    
Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao 
October 14, 2013 
 
The People’s Liberation Army 
General Political Department  
 
Political Warfare with Chinese 
Characteristics  


 
1 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
About the Project 2049 Institute 
The Project 2049 Institute seeks to guide 
decision makers toward a more secure Asia 
by the century’s mid-point. The 
organization fills a gap in the public policy 
realm through forward-looking, region-
specific research on alternative security 
and policy solutions. Its interdisciplinary 
approach draws on rigorous analysis of 
socioeconomic, governance, military, 
environmental, technological and political 
trends, and input from key players in the 
region, with an eye toward educating the 
public and informing policy debate. 
 
www.project2049.net 
Cover image and below: Chinese nuclear test. Source: CCTV. 
Cover image source: 997788.com. 
Above-image source: ekooo0.com 
Above-image caption: “We must liberate Taiwan” 
 

 
2 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………….……………….……………………….3 
 
Universal Political Warfare Theory…………………………………………………….………………..………………4 
 
GPD Liaison Department History…………………………………………………………………….………………….6 
 
Taiwan Liberation Movement…………………………………………………….….…….….……………….8 
 
Ye Jianying and the Third United Front Campaign…………………………….………….…..…….10 
 
Ye Xuanning and Establishment of GPD/LD Platforms…………………….……….…….……….11 
 
GPD/LD and Special Channel for Cross-Strait Dialogue………………….……….……………….12 
 
Jiang Zemin and Diminishment of GPD/LD Influence……………………….…….………..…….13 
 
PLA Military Liaison Work…………………………………….…………………………………………..………..……14 
 
GPD Organizational Structure………………………………….…………………………………………………..……17 
 
Overview of the General Political Department……………………………….….……………………..18 
 
GPD/LD Leadership and Organization…………………..……………………….………………………20 
 
Military Region Liaison Departments……………….……………………………….…….……………..30 
 
PLA Air Force and Navy Liaison Work……………………………………………….……..…………….31 
 
Liaison Training and Education……………………………………………………………….…………….31 
 
Military Liaison Work and CCP Systems………………………………………………….……….………………..31 
 
Internal PLA Relations……………..…………………………………….………………….………………….32 
 
United Front System………………………………………………………………….………..………………..33 
 
CCP Propaganda System…………..………………………………………………….…….………………….35 
 
External Affairs System……………………………………………………………….…….………………….36 
 
State Security System………………………………………………………………….…..……….……………38 
 
Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………………………..…………………………40 

 
3 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
 
INTRODU CTION  
 
 
 
Political warfare is a critical component of Chinese security strategy and foreign policy. 1 
All nation-states seek to influence policies of others to varying degrees in order to secure their 
respective national interests . Political warfare seeks t o influence emotions, motives, objective 
reasoning, and behavior of foreign governments, organizations, groups, and individuals in a 
manner favorable to one’s own political-military objectives. The People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) and the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) rely on political warfare as a means to 
shape and define the discourse of international relations.  
Chinese political warfare , or liaison work  in contemporary PLA lexicon,  has a rich 
tradition built upon centuries of military history . During the civil w ar between the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) and the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang; KMT), enemy and liaison work 
were critical means of undermining enemy morale  and building domestic and international 
support. Since establishment of a subordinate Enemy Work Section in 1939, GPD has attempted 
to engineer the final political resolution of the Chinese civil war on CCP terms. The Republic of 
China (ROC; Taiwan) remains the primary target of PLA political warfare. Taiwan’s democratic 
system of government – an alternative to mainland China’s authoritarian model – presents an 
existential challenge to CCP political authority. With political legitimacy across the Taiwan Strait 
viewed as a zero -sum game within the international arena, authorities in  Beijing have long 
sought the political subordination of the ROC to the PRC under a “One Country, Two Systems” 
principle. The GPD/LD plays a critical role in a coercive persuasion campaign intended to 
manipulate international perceptions of “One China ” and und ermine Taiwan’s international 
legitimacy. 
The object of CCP political warfare has extended beyond Taiwan. Guided by the doctrinal 
principle of “ uniting with friends and disintegrating enemies,”  political warfare  adopts active 
measures to promote the rise o f China within a new international order  and defend against 
perceived threats to state security. Political warfare employs strategic psychological operations 
as a means of leading international discourse and i nfluencing policies of friends and foes alike. 
Propaganda, carried out both during peacetime and in armed conflict, amplifies or attenuates 
the political effects of the military instrument of national power.2 
A number of party and  state organizations engage in political warfare. Under the 
leadership of the CCP Central Military Commission (CMC), however, the PLA General Political 
Department (GPD)  Liaison Department (GPD/LD; 总政治部 联络部 ) is the PLA’s principle 
political warfare command.3 GPD liaison work augments traditional state diplomacy and formal 
military-to-military relations, which are normally considered to be the most important aspects 
of international relations.  For the PLA, however, traditional diplomacy is only one means of 
influence, and perhaps not the most significant.  

 
4 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Informed by a long tradit ion of “people’s diplomacy,” GPD/LD leverages a diverse set of 
non-governmental platforms in performing its mission. At least two appear under direct 
GPD/LD authority, one responsible for international friendly contact and the other for cross -
Strait exchanges. Other platforms with GPD links are more opaque. For example, a n extreme  
anti-American platform – the Dongfang Yi Cultural Expansion Association – appears to support 
GPD in development of concepts associated with “ Three Warfares” – the integrated application 
of strategic psychological warfare, overt and covert media manipulation, and  use of law in 
political warfare.  
GPD/LD functions as an interlocking directorate that operates at the nexus of politics, 
finance, military operations, and intelligence.  GPD/LD and associated platforms are windows 
connecting elites from around the world with the CMC, and indirectly, the CCP Political Bureau 
Standing Committee, and an informal yet powerful political group referred to as “princelings.”  
Its leadership engages across a complex network of personalized relationships and implied 
associations. GPD/LD also appears to leverage relationships with institutional and personal 
executive assistants, or mishu, supporting senior civilian and military cadre.4 
GPD/LD has few analogous counterparts in modern democratic societies. It often is cast 
as a member of China’s intelligence community. Indeed, a n historical  review reveals the co -
evolution of CCP political warfare and clandestine intelligence operations. However, viewing 
liaison work exclusively in intelligence terms diminishes its relevance to U.S. political and 
military leaders and counterparts around the worl d. GPD/LD functions as a member of China’s 
broader political-military intelligence system. Its scope, however, appears limited to intelligence 
that may directly support political warfare, including development of psychological and social 
profiles of elites best positioned to influence foreign and defense policies. 
This monograph traces a complex network designed to inf luence policies of the U.S., 
Taiwan, and other s around the world. Public information on GPD/LD has been limited, and 
assessing any country’s strategic influence operations can be a speculative endeavor. An 
examination of the  organization, its history, missions, and relationships with other systems 
within the CCP bureaucracy  may provide a n initial framework within which to evaluate the 
PLA’s capacity for political warfare.  
 
 
UNIVERSAL POLITICAL WARFARE THEORY 
 
 
 
Contemporary PLA liaison work is influenced by Marxist-Leninist theory, tempered by 
traditional Chinese strategic culture, and informed by careful study of foreign political warfare 
experiences since World War II. While relatively significant in its scope and capabilities, 
political warfare is not u nique to China. Political warfare seeks to influence emotions, motives, 
objective reasoning, and behavior of foreign governments, organizations, groups, and 
individuals in a manner favorable to one’s own objectives.5  

 
5 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Political warfare should be  distinguished from public diplomacy. Put simply, public 
diplomacy is international political advocacy carried out in a transparent manner through 
routine media channels  and public engagements . 6  Political warfare differs from public 
diplomacy in terms of target and intent. While public diplomacy seeks to influence opinions of 
mass audiences, political warfare involves a calculated manipulation of an opposing side’s 
strategies, defense policies, and broader international norms. As Michael Waller from the 
Institute of W orld Politics notes, political warfare is needed "when public relations statements 
and gentle, public diplomacy -style persuasion - the policies of “ soft power ” - fail to win the 
needed sentiments and actions.”7 
Political warfare employs coercive persuasion to weaken an opponent’s political will and 
compel a course of action favorable to one's own interests. Policymakers , both civilian and 
military, are influenced through perceptions and psychological conditioning, and thinking may 
be affected by the words a nd actions of a potential adversary.  In his classic National Defense 
University treatise published in 1989, Paul Smith defines the issue: 
Political war is the use of political means to compel an opponent to do one's will, political 
being understood to desc ribe purposeful intercourse between peoples and governments 
affecting national survival and relative advantage. Political war may be combined with 
violence, economic pressure, subversion, and diplomacy, but its chief aspect is the use of 
words, images, and  ideas, commonly known, according to context, as propaganda and 
psychological warfare. 8 
 
Political warfare also has been defined as “the art of heartening friends and 
disheartening enemies, of gaining help for one’s cause and causing the abandonment of th e 
enemies.”9 Strategic influence may be expanded by exacerbating existing tensions or creating 
new friction within an opponent’s political system or among coalition partners. For the purposes 
of this study, political warfare, influence operations, liaison work, and perception management 
are used interchangeably. Perception management is defined by the U.S. Department of Defense 
as: 
Actions to convey and/or deny selected information and indicators to foreign audiences 
to influence their emotions, motives, an d objective reasoning as well as to intelligence 
systems and leaders at all levels to influence official estimates, ultimately resulting in 
foreign behaviors and official actions favorable to the originator's objectives. In various 
ways, perception managem ent combines truth projection, operations security, cover 
and deception, and psychological operations. 10 
 
Perception management manipulates pre -existing beliefs, conditions a target audience 
toward a belief by presenting information bit -by-bit, and presenti ng parts of the truth while 
holding others in reserve. Perception management requires overall design of timing and flow of 
information, measures of effectiveness, and consideration of second-order effects.11 
Political warfare tools include psychological ope rations and propaganda , among others . 
The phrase psychological warfare is reported to have first entered the English language in 1941 
as a translated mutation of the German term Weltanschauungskrieg, or literally, “worldview 
warfare” – the scientific application of propaganda, coercion, and socio-cultural manipulation as 
a means of securing an ideological victory over one's enemies.12 As one leading authority notes: 

 
6 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Propaganda-that is, political advocacy aimed abroad with hostile intent-is usually 
but not al ways deployed in conjunction with some form of political organization. 
The organizational weapon, often clandestine in some measure, is essentially 
hostile to the constitutional structure of the existing state in the target area. 
 
German propaganda theory during World War II stressed a number of principles, such 
as the centrality of intelligence. Sources today could include communications intelligence and 
cyber espionage. Intelligence tailored for propaganda, and political warfare more broadly, 
should be ta rgeted, sustained, well -funded and staffed, and appropriately subordinated within 
the command structure. Generally, propaganda theory stressed the need for a single planning 
and execution authority, issuing directives, explaining directives to important of ficials, and 
cognizance over other entities’ activities that could  have propaganda consequences. Propaganda 
specialists could be non -uniformed personnel, either senior non -government civil ians or 
clandestine operators. Political warfare can integrate a sig nificant percentage of disciplined 
volunteers who are comfortable with a structure command and control system. Stressing 
targeted psychological effects, propaganda was integrated into all stages of military planning.13 
Propaganda theory also stresses themes. For example, inevitable victory and bandwagon 
appeals seek to persuade an audience to embark on a course of action that "everyone else is 
taking" in order to reinforce a natural desire to be on the winning side. Inevitable victory  calls 
upon those not al ready on the bandwagon to join those already on the road to certain victory. 
Appeals to authority cite elite figures as a means to support a position, idea, argument, or course 
of action. Political warfare specialists use glittering generalities – intensely emotion-laden words 
linked with highly valued concepts and beliefs, such as desire for peace, patriotism, cultural 
unity, and ethnicity, which carry conviction without supporting information or reason. Political 
warfare also presents false choices, refle cting a deliberate attempt to eliminate the middle 
ground on an issue.  
The former Soviet Union waged political warfare through a program known as active 
measures. Active measures involved manipulative use of slogans, distorted arguments, 
disinformation, and carefully selected true information in order to influence the attitudes and 
actions of foreign publics and governments. The KGB was responsible for “black,” or covert 
active measures, which employed agents of influence, covert media manipulation, and fo rgeries 
in order to shape foreign public perception and attitudes of senior leaders. “Gray” active 
measures leveraged united front entities, think tanks, institutes, and other non -governmental 
organizations that enabled an ostensibly independent line from the Soviet party -state. Gray 
propaganda offered plausible deniability as required. Attributable statements of the Communist 
Party Propaganda Department were referred to as white or overt propaganda.14 
 
 
GPD LIAISON DEPARTMENT HISTORY 
 
 
A preliminary unders tanding of how the PLA is organized for political warfare begins 
with an overview of its unique historical context. While influenced by traditional strategic 
culture, contemporary Chinese political warfare is rooted in the formative years of the CCP. 

 
7 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Inspired by Marxism -Leninist ideology and the Moscow -led Communist International 
(Comintern), underground political work was segmented into multiple systems. An Urban Work 
Department, which evolved in the United Front Work Department  (UFWD), focused on 
ordinary citizens, minorities, students, factory workers, and urban residents. The Social Work 
Department, which was established in February 1939  as an operational arm of the Central 
Special Work Committee, concentrated on the upper social elite of enemy civilian authorities, 
security of senior CCP leaders, and Comintern liaison.15  
A newly established third underground  work community was responsible for political 
warfare against opposing military forces.16 Under the leadership of GPD Director Wang Jiaxiang 
(王稼祥; 190 6-1974) and Deputy Director Tan Zheng ( 谭政; 1906 -1988), GPD’s underground 
system consisted of  enemy work and liaison work. The GPD Enemy Wo rk Section was 
established in October 1937 . Its expansion  to a second -level department in 1940  reflected the 
growing importance of enemy work in the struggle against Japanese occupation.17 
Enemy work departments were formed under GPD and within the Political Departments 
of the PLA’s two principle corps – the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army. 18 A Japan-
educated Marxist theorist, Wang Xuewen (王学文; 1895-1995), was appointed to head the new 
department, and remained in the position until the Japanese surrender in August 1945. Wang 
Shiying ( 王世英; 1905 -1968), who had managed enemy work operations in northern China , 
succeeded Wang Xuewen . Lin Zhifu ( 林植夫; 1891 -1965), a Japan -educated native of Fujian 
Province, directed the New Fourth Army Enemy Work Department . He  was replaced by Liu 
Guanyi (刘贯一; 1908-1991) in January 1941.19 Basic training was carried out at the Enemy Work 
Cadre School.  The GPD Enemy Wo rk Department also established a school in Yan’an for 
psychological reprogramming of Japanese prisoners of war.20 
In addition to enemy work departments , GPD formed a Liaison Department and similar 
staff organizations under the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army in November 1938. The 
GPD Liaison Department was responsible for coordinating with KMT military leaders in fighting 
the Japanese under the  Second United Front. The GPD Liaison Department director, Wang 
Ruofei (王若飞; 1896-1946), was dual hatted as Eight Route Army deputy chief of s taff. Before 
assuming this position, he had been secretary general of GPD , director of the CCP United Front 
Work Department, and secretary general of the Central Committee General Office . The director 
of the GPD Liaison Department oversaw at least two subordinate sections – the Liaison Section 
and the Friendly Work Section. Zou Dapeng ( 邹大鹏; 1907-1967), who eventually emerged as a 
senior figure within the state security apparatus, directed the GPD Liaison Department’s Liaison 
Section. 21 
The three basic liaison and enemy work missions were: 1) build and sustain a united 
front with friendly, sympathetic military figures; 2) undermine the cohesion and morale of the 
senior enemy leaders and create tensions between officer and enlisted ranks; and 3) win over (争
取; or 拉拢) and incite (策反) defection among those in the middle. “Anti-imperialist” instigation 
relied on psychological and ideological conditioning of senior enemy defense authorities in 
order to weaken national will, generate sympathy for CCP strategic go als, and develop 

 
8 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
clandestine sources of military intelligence. Tactics used include financial incentives, shame, 
and promises of leniency.22  
Taiwan Liberation Movement 
 
The Japanese surrender in August 1945 marked a new phase in the Chinese Civil War. Having 
preserved its strength during the united front between the CCP -KMT against Japanese  
occupation, CCP enemy work shifted focused toward the central Chinese government and  
repatriation of Japanese prisoners of war. For a brief period after a negotiated set tlement 
involving mutual recognition of both parties ’ legitimacy in October 1945 , the Enemy Work 
Department changed its designation to the Nationalist Military Work Department. In 1948, the 
designation reverted back to the Enemy Work Department.23 
In May 1946, the CCP established a Taiwan Provincial 
Work Committee, which was responsible for integrated 
political-military operations to subvert ROC forces on Taiwan. 
A native of Taiwan’s Changhua County,  Cai Xiaoqian (蔡孝乾; 
1908-1982), was assigned as the committee ’s secretary 
general.24 Cai had left Taiwan in 1924 to study at Shanghai 
University’s Sociology Department. He was an original 
Standing Committee member of the Taiwanese branch of the 
Japanese Communi st Party wh en it was formed in 1928. Cai 
was appointed as director of Enemy Work Department under the Eighth Route Army (Field) 
Political Department in 1938. In 1946, Cai Xiaoqian deployed to Taiwan to carry out united front 
political work in preparation for physical occupation of the island.25 Cai Xiao (蔡啸; 1919-1990), 
another native of Taiwan and future GPD/LD deputy director, was responsible for training of 
enemy work operatives. Intensified PLA political warfare operations on Taiwan began after the 
fall of Shanghai in May 1949, when the CCP began delib erate planning for an amphibious  
invasion that was anticipated in April 1950.26 
In January 1950, the ROC’s counterintelligence system 
discovered and disrupted the CCP  clandestine operation. Cai 
Xiaoqian was arrested and recruited  by the KMT , and helped 
neutralize more than 400 CCP operatives on Taiwan, including a 
senior defense ministry official, Wu Shi. Other CCP operatives on 
the island fled to Hong Kong where they joined the newly formed 
Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League, a CCP -approved pro-
unification party that still exists until today.27 
Following the PRC’s entry into the Korean War in October 
1950, Chinese People’s Volunteer Army (CPVA) Political 
Department enemy work operations had primary responsibility for 
political warfare against United Nat ions forces. The CPVA Enemy 
Work Department, directed by Zhang Zizhen  ( 张 梓 桢 ; 1913 -1982), was  responsible for 
management of enemy POWs , propaganda, misinformation, and other tasks . Born in Shanxi’s 


 
9 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Lingshi County, Zhang Zizhen ( 张梓桢 or 张梓祯; 1913 -1982) had joined the PLA and CCP in 
1936. Under the leadership of Political Department Director Xiao Hua (肖华; 1916-1985), Zhang 
directed the Eighth Route Army’s 115th Division’s Enemy Work Department, which conducted 
operations in Shandong. Among his responsibilities was political indoctrination of Japanese 
POWs. During initial incursions onto the Korean peninsula, Zhang served as deputy director of 
the 50th Corps Political Department and subsequently director of the CPVA Political Department 
Enemy Work Department. His deputy director, Wang Xinggang (王兴纲; 1905-1993), had been a 
senior operative who clandestinely liaised with senior KMT officers, and succeeded in a number 
of major defections during the Civil War.28 
Between 1949 and 1955, the CCP ’s intelligence and state security system exp erienced 
significant flux . Influenced in part by Sovie t advisors, Zhou Enlai dissolved the Social Work 
Department in 1949 and separated security and external intelligence functions through 
establishment of the Ministry of Public Security and the General Staff Department ( GSD) 
Liaison Department. Authority over the GSD Liaison Department was exercised by both the CCP 
General Office and a short-lived CMC General Intelligence Department. 29 In 1951, the CCP 
leadership recalled former GPD director Wang Jiaxiang  from his posting as the first PRC 
ambassador to the Sov iet Union  in order  to form the CCP International Liaison Department  
(CCP/ILD). Assisting Wang were a number of former GPD Enemy Work Department and 
Liaison Department officers.30 
By July 1955, however, Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai 
reassigned the GSD Liaison De partment’s intelligence mission  to 
the CCP Secretariat and its designation as the Central Investigation 
Department (CID).31 At the same time, the CCP changed the name 
of the  GPD Enemy Work Department to the GPD Liaison 
Department. In 1955, Zhang Zizhen was awarded the rank of major 
general and appointed as GPD/LD director. Over the next two 
decades, GPD/LD ’s primary mission  was to undermine the 
legitimacy of the governing  ROC authorities on Taiwan, manage 
territorial disputes, and counter “U.S. imperialism.” In 1956, the 
CCP established a Taiwan Affairs Leading Small Group (TALSG) 
and a standing office that was managed in large part by CID and 
GPD/LD officers. 
During the late 1950’s, GPD and the state security carried out missions intended to sow 
distrust within Taiwan society and between Taiwan and the United States. An example of early 
CCP use of misinformation and forgery  can found in  a series of letters that were delivered to 
ROC President Chiang Kai -shek through his son, Chiang Ching -kuo, proposing direc t peace 
talks, and a negotiated solution that would grant the authorities on Taiwan a high degree of 
autonomy. According to one assessment, CCP efforts were intended to undermine resolve on 
Taiwan and create mistrust between United States and Taiwan through planting misinformation 
through media outlets in Hong Kong and Singapore. An English-language media report 
published out of Singapore in 1962 asserted that Chiang Kai -shek’s inner circle had reached a 
secret agreement with the CPP after more than five years of negotiations. The report alleged that 


 
10 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Chiang had agreed to accept Taiwan’s status a self -governed autonomous region, but only after 
Chiang’s passing. Denied vigorously by political authorities on Taiwan, official U.S. reporting 
casted doubt on the a rticle’s assertions and identified the source as Cao Juren  (曹聚仁; 1900-
1972), a Hong Kong-based reporter.32  
While Taiwan  remained its central focus , GPD/LD turned to other contentious areas . 
MG Zhang Zizhen and a political warfare team that was forward deployed in Tibet managed the 
large number of Indian internees d uring the 1962 Indian -China border clashes , among other 
responsibilities. During the Cultural Revolution , GPD/LD operations were severely curtailed. 
Following the PLA’s absorption of the Central Committee’s civilian intelligence service in March 
1967, Zhang was assigned as secretary general of GPD  in June 1967 , where  he served until 
October 1968. By November 1969, the Liaison Department was incorporated in the GPD Mass 
Works Department.33   
Ye Jianying and the Third United Front Campaign 
 
GPD/LD was reconst ituted at the conclusion of the Cultural 
Revolution and renewed its Taiwan -focused political  warfare 
operations. MG Yang Side (杨斯德; b. 1921 ) directed PLA liaison 
work from 1975 to 1985. MG Yang  was an experienced enemy work 
specialist.34 He is often viewed as a protégé of Marshal Ye Jianying 
(叶剑英; 1897 -1986) and Yang Shangkun  (杨尚昆 ; 1907 -1998). 35 
After U.S. normalization of relations with the PRC in January 1979, 
the late patriarch Deng Xiaoping announced preparations for a 
“Third CCP -KMT United Front” on Dece mber 15, 1979, which 
granted the UFWD a prominent role in cross-Strait policy within the 
party-state policymaking bureaucracy. 36  He also  outlined a 
preliminary concept for promoting a “China model” in place of the 
international communis t movement.  Up to tha t point, the Taiwan policy staff work was 
dominated by the Central Investigation Department (CID), which was eventually folded into the 
MSS.37 To be sure, t he united front, state security, and liaison work systems had worked closely 
together as underground work entities during the Chinese Civil War era. 38 When the Sino -
Vietnamese war broke out in 1979, GPD/LD carried out political warfare operations. However, 
the effectiveness of these PLA campaigns is difficult to ascertain.39  
Backed by a reinvigorated TALS G, Marshal Ye Jianying, then 
chairman of the NPC Standing Committee,  expanded upon the “One 
Country, Two Systems” concept. On September 30, 1981, Ye outlined a 
nine-point proposal that called for unification talks between the CCP 
and KMT on an equal footin g, initiation of cross -Strait trade and other 
functional exchanges, and consultative positions for representatives 
from Taiwan. Beyond subordinating Taiwan as a local area under 
central CCP authority, Ye’s nine-point proposal was viewed as targeting 
U.S. security support for Taiwan. The ROC rejected the “One Country, 


 
11 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Two Systems” proposal, and called for unification under a democratic, free, and non-communist 
system.40 
Ye Xuanning and Establishment of GPD/LD Platforms 
 
Hong Kong was a test-bed for the “One Country, Two Systems” formula and a key theater 
for CCP political warfare . Indeed, CCP intelligence and united front work had been carried out 
in Hong Kong for decades.41 The establishment of two GPD-managed enterprises that supported 
PLA political operations subsequently followed t he signing of the Sino -British Declaration on 
Hong Kong on December 19, 1984.  
 First, the CMC institutionalized a new GPD/LD platform for expanding military liaison 
work out to elites within the broader international community through the China Association for 
International Friendly Contact  (CAIFC). Three days after the signing of the Sino -British Hong 
Kong declaration, CA IFC held its  opening ceremony. Attendees included CMC Vice Chairman 
Yang Shangkun, GPD Director Yu Qiuli  (余秋里 ; 1914-1999); CCP Secretariat member Xi 
Zhongxun (习仲勋; 1913-2002); and director of the Hong Kong/Macau Affairs Office Ji Pengfei (
姬鹏飞; 1910-2000).42  
Since its formation in 1984, the GPD/LD -managed 
CAIFC platform has emerged as an important channel of access 
to CCP princelings – the descendants of the first generation of 
communist revolutionaries who populated senior party, state, 
and military positions after 1949. CAIFC’s first generation 
leadership not only included prominent honorary figures, such 
as Huang Hua (黄华; 1913-2010), but also sons and daughters of 
Deng Xiaoping, Ye Jianying, Wang Zhen, and Yang Shangkun. 
Ye Jianying’s son, Ye Xuanning, was commissioned onto active 
duty in 1984, assigned as deputy director of GPD/LD, and 
concurrently as one of four CAIFC deputy directors.43  
One of Ye’s first tasks was leveraging CAIFC ’s network  to send next generation 
princelings abroad for education. 44  Because of his central and early role in setting up  
institutional structures that support and link elite offspring of the  CCP’s first generation 
revolutionary heroes, Ye Xuanning became known as  the “spiritual leader” of the p rincelings.45 
Ye’s political status was also visibly displayed when he served as an intermediary in the heated 
dispute between Hu Yaobang’s prospective successor Zhao Ziyang and hardline conservative 
Wang Zhen during the summer months before the 13th Party Congress in 1987.46 
In addition to CAIFC, Deng Xiaoping collaborated with cadres Ye Jianying, Wang Zhen, 
and Rong Yiren to exploit the change in Hong Ko ng’s status and establish GSD and GPD 
commercial enterprises  in the special administrative region . Large PLA -managed enterprises 
could ostensibly support the missions of GPD and GSD  by expanding the CCP’s global and 
regional influence. Commercial outlets o ffered a legitimate GPD presence in Hong Kong for 
conducting liaison work, and also to attract Taiwanese and overseas Chinese investment into 
China. The two largest such enterprise groups were Poly Technologies and Carrie Enterprises.47 


 
12 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Reflective of  his expanding portfolio, GPD/LD Deputy Director Ye Xuanning was 
appointed to oversee the newly established Carrie Enterprise Corporation in 1984. Carrie 
Enterprises began initially as a trading company, and then expanded into real estate, 
construction, manufactu ring, mining, and international investment. Over time, the group 
incorporated at least 56 subsidiaries located in Guangzhou, Shanghai, Fuzhou, and Nanjing 
among other locations. As many as 20 Carrie subsidiaries operating out of Hong Kong 
conducted operations against Taiwan.48 
GPD/LD and Special Channel for Cross-Strait Dialogue 
 
With Carrie Enterprise Corporation and CAIFC established, GPD/LD expanded its 
position within the party -military bureaucracy  over the following decade . In 1985, MG Yang 
Side – Ye Ji anying’s protégé – replaced a career state security officer, Yang Yindong, as 
secretary general of the TALSG and director of the TALSG Office. Yang Yindong was assigned to 
form the Huangpu Alumni Association, a new UFWD organization to help promote cross -Strait 
unification under the “One Country, Two Systems” formulation .49 Yang Side offered continuity 
within the Taiwan affairs system with the transition in TALSG leadership in 1987. 50 In this 
position, MG Yang Side was responsible for day to day TALSG operations.51 
The transition of the GPD/LD director to TALSG secretary general is significant. I t 
signaled the prominent position of political warfare in the development of CCP policy toward 
Taiwan.52 Yang Side ’s replacement as GPD/LD director, MG Jin Li ( 金黎; 1927 -1990), was an 
ethnic Korean, and Japan specialist. 53 In his new TALSG Office role, MG Yang Side’s priority 
was to open  a special cross -Strait channel of communication to draw the ROC  leaders into 
political negotiations. Despite previous failed attempts, the  opening for dialogue came with the 
defection of a China Airlines (Taiwan) pilot who flew to Guangzhou in mid-1986. Yang Side and 
GPD/LD Deputy Director Ye Xuanning led a small delegation to Hong Kong to negotiate the 
return of pilot Wang Hsi -chueh (王锡爵; b. 1929 ), and the China Airlines plane. The incident 
and subsequent negotiations marked the first time CCP and KMT authorities carried out dir ect 
talks since the Civil War. By November 1987, the ROC lifted its ban on Taiwanese visits to the 
mainland. Applications to visit relatives on the mainland were managed by the Red Cross.54 
With the passing of ROC President 
Chiang Ching -kuo in 1988, Yang Shangkun 
directed Yang Side to establish a dialogue 
with Chiang’s successor, Lee Teng -hui.  The 
conduit was a neo-Confucian scholar, Nan 
Huaijin (南怀 瑾; 1918-2012), who enjoyed 
connections on both sides of the Taiwan 
Strait. Yang Side solicited the support of a 
representative from the UFWD community, 
Jia Yibin  (賈亦斌; 1912 -2012), to engage in 
the dialogues . Jia was chairman of the 
UFWD’s KMT Revolutionary Committee and 
a Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) Standing Committee member. 


 
13 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Yang Side and Jia approached Nan in April 1988 to explore the possibility of creating a liaison 
channel between Yang and Lee.55 
After MG Jin Li passed a way in 1990, the deputy director of GPD/LD, MG Ye Xuanning, 
was promoted to replace him. With establishment of the National Unification Council, President 
Lee Teng-hui authorized representatives to meet with former GPD/LD Director Yang Side, Jia 
Yibin, and  others at Nan Huai -jin’s Hong Kong residence  in December 1990 . By early 1993, 
discussions began on confidence building measures (CBMs ). A Hong Kong -based report of 
unknown reliability asserts that Taiwan and an unidentified Nanjing MR office established a  
defense telephone link, or “hotline,” in the mid -1990s. Twenty-six meetings between the secret 
emissaries took place between 1990 and 1995.56 
Jiang Zemin and Diminishment of GPD/LD Influence 
 
The CCP top leadership transition to Jiang Zemin and China’s thi rd generation 
leadership resulted in a relative diminishment of GPD/LD’s footprint within the CCP’s formal 
Taiwan policy community. Jiang began asserting authority over the military and state security 
systems as Deng Xiaoping gradually faded from day to da y management of party affairs. Yang 
Side stepped down as TALSG Office director, and was replaced by a united front system 
specialist, Wang Zhaoguo (王兆国; b. 1941).57 In 1993, Deng Xiaoping – in part on Jiang’s behalf 
– initiated a purge of senior PLA officers, including former CMC Vice Chairman Yang Shangkun 
and his half -brother, GPD Director Yang Baibing  (杨白冰; 1920 -2013). Jiang Zemin replaced 
Yang Shangkun as director of the TALSG in April 1993, and assigned a close ally, Zeng Qinghong 
(曾庆红; b. 1939), to serve as his representative in the special cross-Strait talks.58 
Responding to calls from senior PLA leaders for a greater role in Taiwan affairs, Jiang 
Zemin appointed a Deputy Chief of the General Staff (DCOGS), LTG Xiong Guangkai (熊光楷; b. 
1939), to replace Wang Zhaoguo as secretary general of the TALSG in February 1996 . Jiang 
further advocated in favor of Xiong ’s appointment to head  the Ministry of Sta te Security.59 By 
2002, CMC Vice Chairman Zhang Wannian was assigned as a second PLA member of the 
TALSG.60 Another member of the GSD intelligence community, MG Wang Zaixi, was assigned to 
a key billet within the TALSG Office.61 
Jiang Zemin’s consolidation of  power coincided with t wo scandals linked with the PLA. 
In the first case, a prominent entrepreneur based in Xiamen leveraged connections with the 
provincial government, Ministry of Public Security, GSD Intelligence Department  (also known 
as the Second Department), and GPD/LD officials in order to skirt as much as U.S. $10 billion in 
import duties. Among those prosecuted for corruption was GSD Second Department Director 
MG Ji Shengde (姬胜德), the son of senior diplomat Ji Pengfei. Former Fujian provincial par ty 
chief and Politburo Standing Committee member Jia Qinglin was also implicated in the scandal.  
62 In the second case, another local entrepreneur issued counterfeit stock under the name of a 
Fujian-based GPD/LD Carrie Group subsidiary, Minfa Securities. Es tablished in May 1988, 
Carrie’s Minfa Securities extended a minor stake to local entrepreneur, Wu Yonghong (吴永红). 
Zhang Xiaowei (张晓伟; b. 1954), Minfa’s general manager since 1996, was arrested by Shenzhen 
authorities in 2004, and Wu Yonghong fled to Hong Kong.63  

 
14 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
In July 1998 , Jiang Zemin directed the PLA to divest of its monopolistic enterprises.64 
China Carrie E nterprise Group and China Tiancheng Group were subordinated under State -
Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) China Real Estate 
Development Group in 1999. According to Tai Ming Cheung, a leading authority on PLA 
enterprises, Carrie operations in southern China were  merged with the China Huaneng Group . 
Carrie’s Hong Kong -registered subsidiary, Po Wing Kwan, was transferred to China Strategic 
Holdings in 2000.65 
Shortly after Jiang directed the financial decoupling of military and civilian businesses in 
1998, Ye Xuanning stepped down as head of GPD/LD, yet maintained a seat on the CPPCC. An 
assistant to GPD Director General (GEN) Yu Yongbo (于永波; b. 1931) – Liang Hongchang (梁宏
昌; b. 1947 ) – was appointed acting director of GPD/LD. Born in Shenyang, Liang previously 
served as d eputy director of the GPD Mass Works Department from April 199 1 to December 
1994. As a newly promoted major general, Liang was subsequently assigned as deputy director 
of the GPD General Office in December 1994. In December 1999, Liang began directing GPD/LD 
full time and remained in that position until 2007.66 
By Taiwan’s second direct presidential election in 2000, the PLA’s warfighting 
community had become well entrenched within the TALSG. However, GPD/LD maintained a 
prominent if not leading role in more subtle united front operations. In June 2001, the CMC 
directed the establishment of the China Association for Promotion of Chinese Culture  (CAPCC) 
as a principle GPD/LD platform for cross -Strait political warfare op erations. MG Liang 
Hongchang was appointed as the organization’s first director.67  
 
 
PLA MILITARY LIAISON WORK 
 
 
Military liaison work operates at the nexus of politics, finance, military operations, and 
intelligence to amplify or attenuate the political effect of the military instrument of national 
power.68 In a 2001 study of Chinese foreign policy behavior, one prominent U.S. authority on 
influence operations noted that “the Chinese campaign bears all the hallmarks of a Soviet -era 
"active-measures" operation except that it is far more sophisticated and likely to have a higher 
degree of success.” He added: 
In an orchestrated campaign of good cop/bad cop, Chinese officials have gone directly 
to U.S. public opinion, trying to appeal to sentimental feelings of  cooperation and 
partnership while literally threatening war. The operation is aimed at five levels: the 
American public at large, journalists who influence the public and decision makers, 
business elites, Congress and the president and his inner circle. 69 
 
Leveraging specialized intelligence collection and analysis, liaison work creates and 
exploits divisions within an opposing leadership’s defense establishment; develops and sustains 
rapport with foreign defense elites through exchanges ( 友好交往); influences perceptions on 
Taiwan and other external audiences through propaganda ( 对外宣传 and 对台宣传); strategic, 
operational, and tactical-level psychological operations; and countering an opponent’s efforts to 

 
15 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
shape perceptions within China. According to revised Military Political Work Guidelines issued 
in 2003, PLA liaison work entails: 
Establishing military liaison work policies and regulations, organizing and executing 
Taiwan work; researching and studying foreign military situations; leading All -Army 
enemy disintegration work; in conjunction with relevant General Departments, 
organizing and leading psychological warfare education and training, and technology 
and equipment development; guiding and executing border negotiation political work 
and extern al military propaganda work; assuming responsibility for relevant 
International Red Cross liaison and military-related overseas Chinese work.70 
 
Specific tasks under Article 13 include: 
 
Carrying out work of disintegrating the enemy and uniting with friendl y military 
(elements); researching and studying foreign militaries, enemy militaries, and 
capability and situation of foreign and domestic forces engaging in ethnic splittist 
activities; and leading unit psychological operations studies and training. 71 
 
Investigation and research ( 调查研究 ) is a fundamental component of liaison work.  
Investigation and research supports the development of plans and programs, and is the basis for 
measuring operational effectiveness of a political warfare campaign. Individuals and  
organizations in the U.S., Taiwan, or elsewhere are targeted, researched, and classified as friend, 
enemy, or middle road ers who could be won over as friends. Political warfare intelligence 
requirements include historical, geographic, political, social, e conomic, and cultural attributes 
that shape the outlook of defense policymakers and military leaders. Cognitive mapping entails a 
detailed understanding of the political, ethnic, economic, and cultural contradictions within a 
society, and a defense establishment more specifically. Psychological assessments of elite figures 
examine leaders assess an individual’s career, level of culture, motivation, values, political 
orientation and factional affiliation, social status, family, and professional competency.  
Intelligence collection and analysis on foreign defense and military elite must b e objective, and 
meet both near real-time and long term requirements.72 
International friendly contact, or the establishment and sustainment of personal rapport 
with f oreign defe nse-related elites , is another critical aspect of liaison work. In coordination 
with the foreign affairs community, international friendly contact fosters sympathy, glosses over 
differences, stresses shared values, and expands influence among elites posit ioned to influence 
defense policies. Rapport with selected opinion leaders is a critical element of effective 
propaganda.73 Targeted elites may include retired senior military officers, former members of 
Congress and other legislators, prominent defense academics, among others.74  
Subversion is the flip side of friendly contact work. Ideological subversion, referred to as 
disintegration work ( 分化 瓦解 敌军 ), targets political cohesion of coalitions, societie s, and 
defense establishments. Augmenting the hard aspects of military operations, political 
subversion work includes educating and training domestic civil and military authorities on the 
value of disintegration operations. The planning process involves targeting of individuals or 
groups, and establishment of goal s, requirements, channels, and methodologies. Working 
closely with military warfighters, liaison work units are responsible for exploiting political and 
psychological vulnerabilities, as well as managing prisoners of war in an actual conflict. With 

 
16 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
perceptions serving as the “battlespace,” liaison work can magnify or hide true military 
capabilities. Leveraging propaganda and other means, disintegration work seeks to undermine 
an opponent’s national will through targeting of ideology, psychology, and mo rale. Liaison work 
also entails identifying, evaluating, and recruiting potential intelligence sources.75 
Propaganda manipulates perceptions of selected audiences.  General themes outlined in 
liaison work doctrine include CCP economic, cultural, technologic al, and military achievements 
in order to present an image of political stability, peace, ethnic har mony, and economic 
prosperity. Propaganda helps legitimize the CCP through positive, selective presentation of 
party policies and principles. The CCP is cas t as the sole legitimate inheritor of China's long 
history and traditional culture , and has made an outstanding contribution to prosperity, peace, 
and human progress. The people of China enjoy a long tradition of friendship with peace loving 
people through out the  world, and its leaders are worthy of trust. 76 The optimal means of 
projecting a positive image of China, the CCP, and its policies is through a doctrinal principle of 
“using foreign strength to propagandize for China” (利用外力为我宣传).77 
PLA l iaison work a lso seeks to counter external political warfare. In such efforts, the 
focus is placed on countering adversarial strategies that seek to Westernize and weaken party 
control through peaceful evolution and promotion of universal values. As a result, investmen t 
into psychological defense and ideological education of military officers and men is imperative, 
as is guarding against enemy subversive activities. 78 Defensive operations also entail internet 
monitoring and restricting media access. For example, Chinese security directives in 1999 
restricted reception of foreign satellite broadcasting to foreign invested enterprises, specified 
hotels, and higher level work units on a need to know basis.79 
In sum, liaison work involves the development and execution of poli tical warfare 
strategies intended to influence foreign defense policies and Taiwan -related perceptions.  While 
the general themes are strikingly similar, Chinese political warfare appears to differ from the 
Soviet model in terms of organization and approac hes, including black propaganda. L imited 
information is available regarding methodologies such as covert media placement, drafting and 
dissemination of forged documents, and clandestine recruitment and exploitation of agents of 
influence. Chinese political warfare appears to rely largely upon media manipulation through 
gray platforms that offer a moderate level of plausible deniability.  One recent Xinhua article 
advocated in favor of greater transparency of military-related platforms.80 
 
GPD ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE 
 
 
The PLA is the political-military arm of the CCP, which exercises control over political 
warfare through the Political Bureau (Politburo) and its seven-member Standing Committee. As 
of 2013, the CMC chairman and two vice chairmen are among the P olitburo’s 25 members. The 
CCP Secretariat manages the Politburo’s daily operations and coordinates the implementation of 
central directives. Leading sm all groups also play a role in coordinating across the party and 

 
17 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
state bureaucracies. The Politburo Standing Committee, Secretariat, and leading small groups 
rely heavily on the Central General Office for administration and oversight.81  
The Politburo exercises  control over the military through the CMC and GPD -managed 
political work system.  CMC management of military operations, political work, logistics, and 
acquisition and technology is exercised by four first level departments ( 一级部): GSD, GPD, 
General Logistics Department (GLD), and General Armaments Department (GAD). The 
administrative PLA organizational structure offers a high degree of uniform ity and 
specialization across these four general departments, seven military regions,  the Navy, Air 
Force, and Second Artillery Force. 
 
Although ranking second in protocol order, GPD’s power stems from the PLA’s status as 
a party a rmy, its political position within the Communist Party, and its role in ideological 
PLA GENERAL POLITICAL DEPARTMENT LEADERSHIP 
    
 
 
GEN Zhang Yang  
张阳 
 
Director 
12/ 2012 – Present 
b. 1951 
 
    
 
GEN Jia Ting’an82 
贾廷安 
 
Deputy Director 
1/ 2008 – Present  
 
b. 1952 
 
GEN Du Jincai83 
杜金才 
  
Deputy Director/ 
CMC Discipline Inspection 
Committee Secretary  
12/ 2009 – Present  
 
b. 1952 
    
 
GEN Wu Changde84 
吴昌德 
 
Deputy Director 
6/2011 – Present 
 
b. 1952 
 
Lieutenant General 
(LTG) Yin Fanglong85 
殷方龙 
  
Deputy Director 
10/2012 – Present  
 
b. 1953 
    
 
LTG Cui Changjun86 
崔昌军 
 
Assistant to the Director 
12/2012 – Present 
 
b. 1953 
 
 
VADM Cen Xu87 
岑旭 
 
Assistant to the Director  
12/2012 – Present  
 
b. 1953 


 
18 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
indoctrination.88 GPD also exercises control over PLA’s domestic security through its exclusive 
representation on the CCP Political and Legal Committee. Representatives of t he PLA political 
work system often are members of provincial, municipal, and county level party committees. As 
the executive agent of the CCP for political loyalty and ideological discipline within the military, 
GPD also has been represented on party -state policy coordination bodies . Over the decades, 
GPD officers have filled senior CMC executive staff billets, particularly within the CMC General 
Office.89 
The GPD leadership oversees functional organizations, referred to as second level 
departments (二级部), which are directed by an officer with a grade equivalent to a corps leader. 
PLA officers, and the billets to which they are assigned, have both a rank and grade. The latter is 
more important than rank in assessing the protocol position of an officer and his organization 
within the party, state, and military bureaucracy. The civilian party -state apparatus has a 
parallel grade structure that is used to judge relative positions. Chinese political culture is 
characterized by consciousness of ranks or grades that earmark the relative standing of 
individuals, bureaucratic organizations, state -owned corporations across party, state, and 
military boundaries.  The grade system determines chain of command within GPD, as well as 
horizontal relationships with other PLA gen eral departments, services, Second Artillery Force, 
and civilian party-state organs. Comparative civil-military grades are particularly relevant in the 
case of the GPD liaison work system, which appears to assign officers to civilian departments. 
 
Overview of the General Political Department 
The GPD is managed by a director, four deputy directors, and two assistants to the 
director. The former commander of the Guangzhou Military Region, GEN Zhang Yang, has 
directed the GPD and served as a member of the CMC since 2012. 90 The f our GPD deputy 
directors have a grade equivalent to a military region leader GPD also oversees political 
academies located in Nanjing and Xian. Assistants to the GPD Director have a grade equivalent 
GPD Grade and Rank Structure 
Grade GPD (Ranks) 
CMC Member (军委委员) GPD Director (GEN) 
MR Leader (正大军区职) GPD Deputy Directors (GEN/LTG) 
MR Deputy Leader (副大军区职) Assistants to the Director (LTG/MG) 
Corps Leader (正军职) 2nd-Level Departments and Directors (MG/LTG) 
Corps Deputy Leader (副军职) 2nd-Level Department Deputy Directors (MG/SCOL); base 
leaders; some 2nd-level Bureaus and Directors; base directors 
and PCs 
Division Leader (正师职) Bureaus (3rd-Level Departments) and Directors (SCOL/MG) 

 
19 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
to a military region deputy leader. 91 Each deputy director  is assigned a portfolio involving 
oversight of two or three of the 11 GPD’s second-level departments. 
 The General Office  provides executive support for the GPD leadership. A secretary -
general and a deputy secretary -general oversee General Office affairs, i ncluding a Foreign 
Affairs Bureau that is responsible for managing direct exchanges between GPD elements and 
counterpart organizations, including participation in international law conferences and 
other events.92 
 The Cadre Department  oversees officer person nel management,  including policy and 
planning, evaluations, approval of promotions, retirements , and other personnel actions. In 
line with its responsibilities, the Cadre Department maintains files on each officer in the 
PLA. 
 The Organization Department  is tasked with the management of political work and 
party affairs system of the PLA. The department plays a significant role in personnel 
management and coordination with party committees that exist throughout the PLA. Former 
Organization Department Director , MG Qin Shengxiang  (秦生祥; b. 1957) , directs the CMC 
General Office, which provides executive support to the CMC leadership, including CMC 
Chairman and CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping (习近平; b. 1953).93 
 The Propaganda Department  carries out domestic politica l education work, and 
manages overt propaganda in support of military diplomacy. The GPD Propaganda 
Department External Propaganda Bureau, also referred to as the MND International 
Communications Bureau, was formed in 2006.94 
 The Security Department  has law  enforcement responsibilities, including  crime 
prevention, criminal investigation, counterintelligence, personnel background 
investigations, political reliability assessments, and safeguarding of classified military 
information. In addition to performing s taff functions related to the CMC/GSD Central 
Guards Bureau, t he Security Department also oversees the PLA’s prison and re -education 
system.95  According to one Taiwan -sourced report, GPD/LD also has a limited counter -
intelligence function, with some overlap with the GPD Security Department.96 
 The Subordinate Work Department . The Subordinate Work Department  oversees 
GPD-subordinate corporate enterprises and a number of miscellaneous organizations. These 
include the Military Museum, PLA Art Academy, August 1st  (Bayi) Studio, PLA Publishing 
House, PLA Pictorial Magazine, PLA Daily, PLA Literary Art Publishing House, PLA Song 
and Dance Troop, PLA Opera Ensemble, PLA Play Ensemble, PLA Band, PLA Bayi Sports 
Team, Xinhua News Agency (PLA detachment), China Central Television (CCTV) Military 
Department, and China National Radio Military Department. 
 Legal Oversight Organizations. Three other organizations are responsible for discipline 
and military law. The Discipline Inspection Department functions as inspector general, and 
supports the CMC’s Discipline Inspection Commission in investigating corruption and other 
improprieties. PLA Military Court  and Military Procuratorate  manage the PLA’s justice 

 
20 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
system. The PLA Military Court is said to play an important role in an e volving concept 
referred to as legal warfare.97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GPD/LD Leadership  
The GPD/LD chain of command runs up through the GPD Director  to the CMC  
chairman and chairman . One of three or four GPD deputy director s likely is assigned liaison 
work as part of h is portfolio. GPD/LD is organized in a similar manner as other second level 
departments within the PLA. The department consists of multiple bureaus, which in turn consist 
of multiple staff divisions. On behalf of the CMC and Politburo, GPD/LD exercises exe cutive 
authority over selected platforms cross-Strait dialogue and international exchanges. 98  The 
GPD/LD leadership includes a director, between three and six deputy directors, bureau  
directors, and an advisory group.99  
MG Xing Yunming (邢运明; b. 1955) has served as GPD/LD 
Director since 2007.100 With roots in Shandong ’s Shanxian County , 
MG Xing’s official biography indicates previous assignments  within 
various government bureaucracies. Based on a preliminary survey, the 
assignment of GPD off icers to civilian billets appears routine. He was 
first anchored in 1976 within Nanjing City and Jiangsu Province 
Foreign Affairs Offices, before being transferred to Beijing in 1987. In 
the mid -1990s, Xing Yunming allegedly served as an executive 
assistant (mishu) to a senior GPD/LD officer. 101 He was subsequently 
promoted to serve as director of the Liaison Department First Bureau.102 In 2003, MG Xing was 
appointed as CEO of the Jingwei Information Technology Company, a key outlet for cross -Strait 
propaganda.103 MG Xing is also a member of the CPPCC External Friendship Sub-Committee.104 
MG Li Xiaohua  (李晓华; b. 1957 ) has se rved as GPD Liaison Department d eputy 
director since at least 2011.  He is dual hatted as a CAIFC deputy d irector. A native of Shanxi 
Province, he attended undergraduate student at Jilin University School of Economics  between 
1977 and 1981, then attended graduate school at the Institute of Economic of Shanxi Academy of 
Social Sciences in. He earned a masters degree from Jilin University’s Department of Economics 
Military Court 
 
 
General Office Organization Department 
 
Liaison Department 
Cadre Department 
 
Discipline Inspection Department 
Propaganda Department 
Military Procuratorate 
Security Department 
GENERAL POLITICAL DEPARTMENT 
Subordinate Work Department 
General Political Department Organizational Chart 

 
21 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
in 1983. In 1986, he was dual hatted as a lecturer of Central University of 
Finance and Economics.105 
Between 1990 and 1996, Li Xiaohua was embedded with the 
Guangdong Economic and Trade Commission, most likely as an analyst.  
In 1996, he was assigned to the State Planning Commission General Office, 
where he was section chief and vice d irector.  In 2003, he worked within a 
bureau within the State Council Research Office. 106  In 2 008, he was 
identified as a GPD/LD bureau d irector and as CAIFC dep uty director.107 
In 2011, he was named deputy director  of the Chinese Association for 
South Asian Studies. He also served as deputy director of the China White 
Jade Seminar and deputy director of the White Jade Research Association.108 
MG Chen Zuming  (陈祖明; 1956) is a former director of 
the GPD Liaison Department Liaison Bureau and CAIFC 
secretary general in the 2006 -2010 timeframe. He has a 
background in Russian affairs. 109 After graduation from Beijing 
University’s Russian language department and Moscow Technical 
University, he was embedded with the State Council International 
Exchange Center, and managed Eastern Europe and Central 
Asian issues. Chen Zuming is also deputy director of the  China 
Association of Southeast Asian Studies  and China Painting 
Academy for Friendly Contact (CPAFC; 中国友联画院).110 
MG Xin Qi (辛旗 ; b. 1961 ) has served as GPD/LD deputy 
director since at least 2011. With roots in Beijing, Xin Qi is one of 
China’s foremost authorities on Taiwan and one of the few active duty 
PLA general officers to have visited the island. 111 He most likely replaced 
MG Shen Weiping (沈卫平; b. 1952 ) upon his retirement .112 In 1985, h e 
began his Taiwan-related career and has worked under four directors, 
starting with Yang Side. Under the leadership of Yang Side and Ye 
Xuanning, Xin Qi was a supporting s taff officer during low key cross -
Strait exchanges in the early  1990s. 113  Early in his career, Xin Qi 
produced a detailed analysis that postulated civilization, rather than 
ideology, as a root of future global conflict. Published in 1991, the book predated a  similar work 
by Samuel Huntington. In an international environment characterized by clashes of culture and 
civilization, Xin Qi is a leading proponent of Taiwan’s integration with China under a “One 
Country, Two Systems” framework.114 
Xin Qi maintains a mul titude of formal affiliations. In addition to his deputy director 
position with GPD/LD , he is a senior director of the PLA’s principle platform for unofficial 
cross-Strait exchanges, the China Association for Promotion of Chinese Culture (CAPCC). Xin Qi 
is a deputy director of CAIFC. He also has research fellowships with the Peace and Development 
Research Center and National Society of Taiwan Studies , China Painting Academy for Fr iendly 
Contact (CPAFC), and Tsinghua University’s International Broadcasting Research Center.115  


 
22 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Emphasizing shared culture, MG Xin Qi has been a leading figure promoting early 
initiation of peace accord negotiations and unification talks  in the Taiwan Strait . For example, 
Xin Qi has proposed the notion of the two sides forming “Cros s-Strait Peace and Development 
Committees” to augment the unofficial SEF -ARATS channel. 116 He has advocated cross -Strait 
cooperation in asserting Chinese maritime sovereignty.117  
GPD/LD Organization 
GPD/LD leaders oversee at least four bureaus.  Bureau direct ors are equal in grade to a 
PLA division leader, with a rank of either senior colonel (SCOL) or major general. Bureaus 
consist of a number of subordinate offices ( 处). Liaison work personnel may be temporarily 
assigned or anchored ( 挂职) to offices within the  CMC staff, PLA departments, State Council 
organs, and/or provincial/municipal-level offices.  Civilian positions to which officers are 
assigned presumably would be equal to or one half grade higher than the officer’s most recent 
position.  
The precise designations of subordinate bureaus under the GPD/LD and their scope of 
operations cannot be confirmed based on existing information. However, a preliminary working 
hypothesis is that GPD/LD is comprised of four bureaus: 1) a liaison bureau responsible for 
clandestine Taiwan-focused operations; 2) an investigation and research bureau responsible for 
international security analysis and friendly contact; 3) external propaganda bureau responsible 
for disintegration operations, including  psychological operations, development of propaganda 
themes, and legal analysis ; and 4) a border defense bureau responsible for managing border 
negotiations and agreements. Bureaus may administer non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
that function as platforms for synchronizing operations with other elements within the party -
state system. Bureau directors carry a grade equal to a division leader. 
Liaison Bureau 
The GPD/LD Liaison Bureau (First Bureau) most likely has responsibility for Taiwan. 118 
As in its early “enemy work” days, GPD liaison work seeks to create and exploit political, 
cultural, and social contradictions within Taiwan, and undermine trust between political -
military authorities on Taiwan and policymakers in Washington. Uniting with friendly military 
(elements) and subver ting enemy military (elements), GPD/LD appears to foster internal 
friction within the pan-Green and the pan-Blue coalition. The Liaison Bureau director has often 
been dual -hatted as one of three GPD/LD Deputy Directors.  The  GPD/LD Liaison Bureau 
appears to manage sub-bureaus in Guangzhou and Shanghai, and possibly in other locations.119   
 Guangzhou Liaison Sub -Bureau. GPD/LD Liaison Bureau operations are centered in 
Guangzhou City. The Guangzhou operations most likely focus not only on Taiwan, but Hong 
Kong and Macau as well. 120  Past GPD/LD Deputy Directors, such as Yang Side and Shen 
Chen, have been dual -hatted as Guangzhou Liaison Bureau d irector.121 CAIFC consultant 
MG (ret.) Lan Xiaoshi also has been cited as a former Guangzhou Liaison Bureau leader.122 
One 2011 local Shenzhen City report refers to the GPD/LD entity as the Southern Bureau.123 
The bureau also appears to manage a Taiwan-related association for Track 1.5 exchanges, the 

 
23 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Taiwan Strait Harmonious Development Foundation, which was established in Novembe r 
2007.124 
 Shanghai Liaison Sub -Bureau. The Shanghai Liaison Sub-Bureau appears to focus on 
political-military intelligence and propaganda work. The bureau allegedly maintains a data 
base on ROC military officers and presumably other foreign military personnel at the rank of 
colonel (O-6) and above. Profiles, updated on a semi -monthly basis, include basic data such 
as date and place of birth, education, personal habits, family, and current location. 125 The 
Shanghai bureau most likely leverages platforms such as  the Shanghai Association for 
International Friendly Contact, and possibly the Shanghai Center for RimPac Strategic and 
International Studies.126  
The GPD/LD Liaison Bureau , perhaps through its entities in Guangzhou and Shanghai,  
appears to manage field offi ces, referred to as work stations, in selected locations. The GPD/LD 
Fujian Work Station is also known as the Fujian Provincial Government Fourth Office. 127 One 
focus area is promotion of the Western Taiwan Strait Zone project.  128 The Fujian Work Station’s 
subordination within the Liaison Bureau and relationship with the GPD 311 Base are unknown 
at this time. A GPD/LD office also reportedly is embedded within the Hubei Party Committee 
External Liaison Office.129 
The principle GPD/LD-managed platform for Taiwan-focused political work is the China 
Association for Promotion of Chinese Culture (CAPCC). Established in June 2001 as a vehicle 
for propaganda and cross -Strait liaison, CAPCC’s Taiwan focus suggests that GPD/LD Liaison 
Bureau manages its day -to-day operati ons. The first CAPCC director was former GPD/LD 
director, LTG (ret) Liang Hongchang. CAPCC is currently chaired by Professor Xu Jialu (许嘉璐; 
b. 1937), who is also a senior CAIFC adviser (see discussion below). GPD/LD Director MG Xing 
Yunming and Deputy Dire ctor MG Xin Qi also serve in senior CAPCC positions.130 CAPCC 
Secretary General Zheng Jian (郑剑; b. 1965) manages the organization’s day-to-day affairs and 
is a prominent public opinion leader on Taiwan issues. 131 Ministry of National Defense and 
TALSG Office r epresentatives have  highlighted the role CAPCC plays in establishing a cross -
Strait trust building mechanism.132 
 


 
24 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
CAPCC oversees subordinate departments responsible for academic research, exchanges, 
and other functions . It also  manages at least two commercia l enterprises, the Huayi Audio -
Visual Company and  Huayi Publishing .133 Huayi Audio Visual Company has cooperated with 
counterparts on Taiwan for movie production , student exchanges,  and an exhibition in Tainan 
regarding the life of Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong).134 In addition to participating in regular cross-
Strait trade and cultural f orums since at least 2006, CAPCC has a close working relationship 
with the Hong Kong -based China Review News .135 As an aside, the PLA Academy of Military 
Science (AMS) appears to have a close working relationship with CAPCC.136 
Investigation and Research Bureau 
 
The GPD/LD Investigation and Research Bureau appears responsible for international 
security analysis and friendly contact. 137  The China Association for Friendly In ternational 
Contact (CAIFC) is a flagship GPD/LD platform that is most likely administered by a specific 
bureau under the GPD/LD. In his landmark study on the role of Chinese think tanks in foreign 
policy, George Washington University professor David Shambaugh assessed that CAIFC may be 
subordinate to the GPD/LD intelligence bureau , which is likely synonymous with the 
investigation and research bureau.   
Established in December 1984, CAIFC facilitates 
influence operations through PRC foreign affairs, state 
security, united  front, propaganda systems, and military 
systems. 138  CAIFC’s main function is establishing and 
maintaining rapport with senior foreign defense and security 
community elites, including retired senior military officers 
and legislators. As a service, CAIFC serv es as a window to 
China’s broader business community. According to a reliable 
source with direct access, GPD/LD officers have, at least in 
one instance, explicitly required a retired senior non -U.S. military officer to agree to publish 
editorials supporting China position and criticize U .S. regional policy in exchange for business 
development support in China.139 
CAIFC’s structure since its inception in 1984 offers insights into GPD/LD leadership and 
nature of the institutionalized relationships within the pa rty-state bu reaucracy. CAIFC 
operational influence centers upon senior and mid -level active duty GPD/LD officers, but also 
leverages across the board of stakeholders . An honorary chairman, three senior advisors, and a 
director are at the top of the protoco l order. All are semi -retired second line authorities 
representing the foreign affairs, state security, united front, or propaganda syst ems. The 
structure consists of an executive deputy director, six deputy directors, assistants to the director, 
a secretary general, three deputy secretary generals, standing members, and consultants. 
A speculative working hypothesis is that the CAIFC secretary general may be dual-hatted 
as director of the GPD/LD Investigation and Research Bureau. The CAIFC secretary general  
manages the organization’s day to day operations and is assisted by three-five deputy secretaries 
general and a number of regional division directors, perhaps corresponding to divisions within 
the Investigation and Research Bureau’s organization structure.140 


 
25 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
The serving director of GPD/LD has traditionally filled the CAIFC executive deputy 
director position. 141 MG Xing Yunming has served as CAIFC executive deputy director since 
December 2006. The CAIFC honorary chairman and director usually are semi -retired s econd 
line authorities from the foreign affairs system. 142 Three of CAIFC’s six dep uty directors appear 
to be dual -hatted active duty GPD/LD deputy directors. 143  One of the three civilian deputy 
directors, Deng Rong (邓榕; b. 1950), is a daughter of Deng Xiaopi ng and has been with CAIFC 
for almost 20 years.144  
Platforms such CAIFC rely not only on senior GPD/LD leaders, 
but also prominent authorities from foreign affairs, state security, 
united front, and other systems. A prominent supporting authority is 
former National People’s Congress ( NPC) Vice Chairman, Xu Jialu. 145 
Professor Xu Jialu is one of China’s most prominent intellectual leaders 
engaged in the promotion of  Chinese political, social, and cultural 
values in the Taiwan Strait and around the world. 146 He h as been 
known to hold a softer line approach  to promoting CCP goals, such as 
unifying the two sides of the Taiwan Strait culturally. 147 Xu Jialu also is 
the honorary chairman of the China Council for Promotion of Peaceful 
National Reunification (CCPPR)  and chairman of the International 
Society for Chinese Language Teaching. He also is affiliated with the 
CCP political-legal security community.148 
Prominent CAIFC board members and co nsultants include Wang Boming  (王波明 b. 
1955), son of former Vice Foreign Minister Wang Bingnan , president of the Stock Exchang e 
Executive Council (SEEC ), and editor-in-chief of Caijing magazine; MG Zhu Chenghu ( 朱成虎; 
b. 1952), grandson of Marshal Zhu De; Chen Haosu, son of Chen Yi and for mer Vice Minister of 
Culture; and  Mao Xinyu, grandson of Mao Zedong .149 Authorities of note also include Guo 
Zhenyuan, who is a member of the GPD/LD advisory committee, senior academic with the 
China Institute of International Studies (CIIS), member of the b oard for China Review News , 
and an instructor at GPD’s Xian Political Academy.150 
CAIFC maintains close relationship with 
other associations, such as the Hong Kong -
based China -U.S. Exchange Foundation 
(CUSEF). CUSEF is chaired by CPPCC Vice 
Chairman C.H. Tu ng and includes Phoenix 
Television CEO and CPPCC National Committee 
member Liu Changle (刘长乐; b. 1951) among 
its most prominent board members. 151 CAIFC 
appears to exercise administrative oversight of a 
network of associations for international 
friendly contac t (AIFC) within selected 
provinces and municipalities. In at least some 
cases, the provincial AIFC executive deputy director concurrently directs Military Region (MR) 
Political Department Liaison Department (see section on MR liaison work). 


 
26 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
The Center for Peace and Development Studies (CPDS) functions as the princ iple 
GPD/LD think tank. Formed in parallel with CAIFC in 1984, CPDS is an analytical organization 
that appears to support CAIFC, GPD/LD, as well as the MSS. Supporting research fellows cut 
across the PLA and Taiwan affairs community.152 
Senior GPD/LD authorities are also prominent in international cultural, philanthropy, 
financial dialogue s, and public diplomacy forums.  One of the most prominent is the Nishan 
Forum on World Civilizations, which was e stablished in 2008 as a response to the United 
Nations resolution on a global agenda for dialogue among world civilizations. Nishan Forum 
organization overlaps with GPD/LD, CAIFC, China Energy Fund Committee, and other cultural 
associations. For example, Xu Jialu chairs the Nishan Forum Organization Committee. GPD/LD 
Director MG Xing Yunming serves as the committee’s vice chairman. GPD/LD deputy director, 
MG Chen Zuming, functions as the forum’s executive director.153 Nishan’s principle mission is to 
enhance promote Confucian values and enhance understanding among different civilizations , 
and e njoys a close affiliation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific, Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO).154  
Another initiative, perhaps reflecting a cooperative relatio nship between GPD 
propaganda authorities and one of China’s most respected media outlets, is the China 
Philanthropy Forum. The forum was established in November 2012 as a joint CAIFC -Caijing 
Magazine initiative to expand international contact and solidify China’s public charity 
community. MG Xing Yunming serves as executive chairman, and Song Enlei as secretary 
general.155  Similar to the China Philanthropy Forum, the Sanya International Finance Forum is 
a joint CAIFC-Caijing initiative to bring together fina ncial and political elites to address a range 
of global issues.156 
Another political warfare platform affiliated with GPD and 
the CCP propaganda and ideology system is the China Energy 
Fund Committee  (CEFC). According to its website, CEFC is a 
“nonprofit, n on-governmental think tank devoted to public 
diplomacy and research on strategic issues with emphasis on 
energy and culture.” 157 An administrative subsidiary of the China 
Huaxin Energy Company, CEFC has a distinct energy , maritime 
security, and cultural prop aganda mission. Sponsored events 
provide an indication of its relative importance, particularly in 
light of China’s presumed priority on understanding sources of energy and security of supply.158 
Ye Jianming (叶简明 ; b. 1977 ) serves as CEFC c hairman. He was dep uty secretary 
general of CAIFC , or possibly CAIFC’s Shanghai branch , from 2003 to 2005. In 2006, Ye 
Jianming was announced as CEO of a number of companies affiliated with Huaxin Energy 
Company. Chen Qiutu (Chan Chauto ; 陈秋途 ; b. 1975)  serves as the chairman’ s executive 
representative, party committee secretary, and also is a senior Nishan Committee member. Both 
Ye Jianming and Chen Qiutu have roots in Fujian Province.   Professor Xu Jialu chairs CEFC’s 
advisory committee, in addition to his CAIFC, CAPCC, Nisha n Forum positions.  He also 
presides over CEFC’s China Institute of Culture. 159 


 
27 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
CEFC maintains branches in Beijing, 
Shanghai, Hong Kong, the United States , and 
Canada. Dai Xu, a PLAAF professor affiliated with 
the PLA National Defense University, is affiliated 
with CEFC’s Beijing branch. He also heads a new 
organization, the Hainan-based Maritime Security 
and Cooperation Academy.  Zhuang Jianzhong  is 
affiliated with CEFC’s Shanghai branch, as well as 
the Center for RimPac Strategic and International 
Studies a nd the Center for National Strategic 
Studies within Shanghai’s Jiaotong University. 160 
Zhang Wu has been affiliated with CEFC’s 
representative office in the United States  and 
CAIFC’s Americas Division . He also serves as deputy secretary general of the Nishan  Forum 
Organizing Committee. 161  Technically a non -governmental organization, CEFC was granted 
“special consultative status” by the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in 
February 2011.162 CEFC has a cooperative relationship with GPD-related organizations, such as 
the Nishan Forum and the GPD 311 Base (see below).163 
External Propaganda Bureau 
 
The GPD/LD External Propaganda Bureau (对外宣传局) appears to function as the PLA’s 
principle staff directorate for applied psychological operations  and propaganda .164 Based on 
guidelines released in December 2003, GPD codified an integrated civil -military approach to 
political warfare that integrates  psychological operations ( 心理战), public opinion or media 
warfare ( 舆论战), and legal warfare ( 法律战). Referred to as the “Three Warfares ” (三战), the 
integrated approach seeks to expand China’s influence within the international community and 
strengthen resistance to internal and external challenges to CCP political authority.165 
Public opinion warfare directs propaganda against mass audiences in order to weaken 
morale, inspire ideological splits within foreign communities viewed as adversarial in nature.  
Targeted groups include not only defense establishments, but also civilian diplomatic, cultural, 
religious, and business organizations. Seeking to counter a perceived Western monopoly on 
international media outlets, propaganda channels include civilian and military  newspapers, 
magazines, television, movies, radio stations, and increasingly i nternet. During crises, public 
opinion warfare is intended to mislead opposing military commanders into errors in judgment. 
Propaganda also targets domestic audiences in order to  strengthen ideological determinism and 
promote unity between civilian and military societies. 166  Military propaganda activities 
ostensibly seek to promote a positive image of the PLA both within China and among foreigners. 
However, defense academics who pro mote hard line, nationalist perspectives also support the 
propaganda system. 
Taiwan is a principle target of Chinese public opinion warfare. GPD/LD appears to work 
closely with a variety of Taiwan -focused media platforms.167 With over 70 percent of Taiwan’s 
population having internet access, Chinese writings stress use of c yberspace as a medium, 
 
Ye Jianming, with Dr. Henry Kissinger 
Source: South China Sea Conversations 

 
28 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
including manipulation of bulletin board sites and chat rooms. 168 GPD/LD may leverage gray 
propaganda outlets in Hong Kong to promote the perception of a united front between KMT and 
CCP on territorial disputes in the East and South China Seas. United front propaganda themes 
target bilateral relations between Taiwan, the U.S., and other coalition partners in the region. 
Among various methodologies and likely targeting pu blic audiences on Taiwan, ad hominem  
attacks seek to discredit selected Americans who highlight U.S. national interests in Taiwan, or 
openly critical of CCP policies.169  
During peacetime, psychological operations identify and exploit divisions within an 
enemy’s political establishment and deter an adversary from taking actions inimical to Chinese 
interests. They also are intended to ensure that PRC policies and military operations are cast in 
the proper light. Psychological operations also are targeted again st an adversary’s value 
concepts. Psychological operations seek to force divisions in alliances and coalitions and reduce 
confidence in an enemy’s economy. Professor Ma Zhong, one of the PLA’s most prominent 
psychological warfare theorists, highlights psyc hological conditioning through foreign media 
channels that create “primacy,” “insiders,” “cry wolf,” and “snake bite” effects. The internet is 
viewed as an increasingly important channel for strategic psychological operations. 170 Legal 
warfare leverages inte rnational law to promote CCP legitimacy, support territorial and 
sovereignty interests, and constrain a potential adversary.171  
An important platform for development of concepts associated with the  Three Warfares 
is the Dongfang Yi  Cultural Expansion Association (东方毅拓展文化协会 ). Dongfang Yi  is 
representative of a neo-Maoist group promoting anti-American principles. 172  In 2009, it  
established a Future Media Warfare Research Lab at Tsinghua University’s School of Journalism 
and Communication as a means of competing for world public opinion. 173 An active proponent 
of redefining the international rules of the game through legal warfare, Dongfang Yi established 
a Military Law Research Center within the China Political Law University’s International 
Exchange Center. 174 Dongfang Yi has co-sponsored at least one conference with CEFC and the 
Maritime Security and Cooperation Academy.175 
 


 
29 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
Former GPD/LD d eputy director and CAIFC consultant, MG (ret) Du Rubo  (杜汝波; b. 
1953), manages Dongfang Yi ’s day-to-day activities. Du Rubo was a key player in formulating 
modern PLA psychological operations theory. 176 He also serves as honorary chairman of the 
China Red Cultural Institute  and has been a member of the United Fro nt Theory Research 
Association.177 Dongfang Yi  highlights the significant contributions of a number of active and 
semi-retired PLA officers, including MG (ret) Luo Yuan.178 
At the forefront of applied psychological operations and propaganda  directed against 
Taiwan is the GPD 311 Base (61716 Unit).179 Headquartered in Fujian provincial city of Fuzhou, 
the GPD 311 Base is a  corps deputy leader grade organization that functions as an operational 
PLA political warfare command. Base leaders appear to support the CCP Taiwan Propaganda 
Leading Small Group, GPD/LD, and the TALSG Office Propaganda Bureau. 180 The 311 Base 
oversees at least s ix regiments responsible for psychological warfare and propaganda targeting 
public opinion on Taiwan. 181 A network propaganda center appears to have a computer network 
operations mission. 182  Other units manage television, audio visual production, and radio 
broadcasting.183 
The 311 Base’s commercial persona  is the 
China Huayi Broadcasting Corporation (CHBC) . 184 A 
principle GPD 311 Base channel is the Voice of the 
Taiwan Strait (VTS). The commander of the 311 Base 
is dual hatted as CHBC CEO, and the VTS director 
also serves as CHBC general manager.185 In 2013, 311 
Base officers reportedly visited Taiwan for initial 
discussions with counterparts on jo int broadcasting 
and film production. 186 The 311 Base is supported by 
the Huaxin Training Center ( 华信培训中心), which is 
affiliated and collated with a subsidiary of the China 
Huaxin Energy Company  – the Fujian Huaxin 
Holding Company. The general manager of the CEFC Fujian Holding Company is Lan Huasheng 
(兰华升; b. 1971 ). Lan concurrently serves as CEFC deputy secretary general and executive 
director of the China Institute of Culture.187 
Border Defense Bureau 
 
The GPD/LD B order Defense B ureau ( 边防局 ) plays a role in influencing border 
negotiations and agreements. China’s border areas are home to ethnic minorities who, from 
Beijing’s perspective, are a potential source of domestic and international unrest. China’s has a 
land boundary of 22,000 kilometers with 14 states, including Russia, North Korea, India, 
Burma, and Vietnam.188 Political work appears to include management of a system of at least 60 
border meeting sites (边防会晤站) around the PRC border. Responsibilities include cross-border 
liaison, intelligence, propaganda, and emergency management of border incidents.189 
 


 
30 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Military Region Liaison Departments 
 
Military Region (MR) Political Departments oversee subordinate organ izations responsible 
for liaison work. Personnel appear to be embedded within selected provincial/municipal -level 
international friendly contact associations and government offices.190 For example: 
 The Nanjing MR Political Department Liaison Department  most likely focuses 
on Taiwan, the United States, and Japan. Its platforms include the Jiangsu Association 
for International Friendly Con tact (JAIFC) and the JAIFC Asia -Pacific Research Center. 
JAIFC’s research center has c o-hosted an annual conference on U.S. regional strategy 
and implications for Chinese security along with CAIFC. 191  
 The Guangzhou MR Political Department Liaison Department  most likely 
focuses on Taiwan, the United States, and Southeast Asia. Its platforms include the 
Guangdong Province Association for Interna tional Friendly Contact (GAIFC)  and the 
GAIFC Asia-Pacific Region Development Research Center. 192 One prominent figure with 
experience in the Guangzhou MR Liaison Department is Qi Qiaoqiao ( 齐桥桥; b. 1949), 
daughter of Xi Zhongxun and sister of Xi Jinping . 193  The relative importance of 
Guangzhou MR liaison work likely grew in the 1990s along with growing investment 
from Taiwan and Hong Kong into the Pearl River Delta.194 
 The Chengdu MR Political De partment Liaison Department most likely focuses 
on India and the rest of South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Tibet. Its platforms include the 
Sichuan Association for International Friendly Contact and its South and Southeast Asia 
Research Center.195 
 Shenyang, Be ijing, Lanzhou, and Jinan MR Political Department Liaison 
Departments most likely focus on Russia, Central Asia, Korea, and Japan. Each likely 
leverages a provincial AIFC as a platform. For example, Executive Deputy Director of the 
Liaoning AIFC, Yang Junq iang, served in the Shenyang MR Politi cal Department 
General Office. Deputy director of the Beijing Association for International Friendly 
Contact (BAIFC), S COL Bao Liangming, directed the Beijing MR Political Department 
Liaison Department in the 2012 timeframe.196 
PLA Air Force and Navy Liaison Work 
PLAAF and presumably PLAN Political Department directors oversee subordinate 
Liaison Departments. 197 The PLAAF Political Department Liaison Department likely analyzes 
psychological effects of long range precision s trike, among other tasks. Prominent PLAAF 
authorities who have emerged from the liaison work system include GEN Liu Yazhou (刘亚洲; b. 
1952), the relatively liberal-minded political commissar of the PLA National Defense University 
(NDU).198 Current 15th Airborn e Corps Political Department Director Luo Yichang formerly 
directed the PLAAF Liaison Department.199  
Liaison Training and Education 

 
31 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
The PLA trains and educates its military liaison work cadre at two GPD professional 
military educational institutions: the Nanjing Political Academy  and the Xian Political 
Academy. 200 In addition to its training and education missile, t he Xian Political Academy 
oversees a Psychological Warfare Research Institute, which was established in the late 1990s in 
conjunction with a test a nd evaluation unit in the Shenyang Military Region. 201 The Nanjing 
Political Academy also oversees a branch school in Shanghai that manages research institutes 
specializing in psychological warfare, as well as information management and foreign military 
political work. 202 GPD/LD has sponsored at least one conference in conjunction with the 
Nanjing Political Academy Shanghai Branch regarding political work toward the U .S. The PLA 
National Defense University also hosts a Three Warfare Research Center. 203 The PLA Navy also 
manages a Psychological Test and Evaluation Center within the Dalian Naval Academy. 204 
Selected GPD liaison work officers appear to receive training at the PLA Institute of 
International Relations in Nanjing, alongside officers serving in the GSD Second Department. 
GPD/LD establishes psychological operation s training requirements  and materials in 
coordination with the GSD Training Department.205 
 
MILITARY LIAISON WORK AND CCP SYSTEMS  
 
 
 
The CCP exercises control over the PRC state and armed forces, in cluding the f inance 
and economic system s, religious organizations, professional associations, non -governmental 
organizations, major media channels, academic institutions, trade unions. GPD/LD appears to 
synchronize efforts of the various party, state, and military communities. However, it does not 
enjoy a monopoly over political warfare. GPD/LD supports, and/or cooperates or competes with 
entities within the party’s united front, propaganda and education, foreign affairs, and state 
security systems.206   
Internal PLA Relations 
 
As its title implies, liaison work entails coordination not only with civilian bureaucracies, 
but also with a broad array o f organizations within the PLA.  In some cases, cooperation may be 
mixed with elements of competition. Liaison wor k amplifies or attenuate s political effects of 
military power. In other words, GPD political warfare seeks to manipulate perceptions of actual 
warfighting capabilities. S ome formal mechanism likely exists to coordinate GPD liaison work 
with GSD, Air Force, Navy, Second Artillery, and military regional commands. 
In terms of direct chain of command, the CMC exercises authority over pol itical warfare 
through the GPD d irector, who also is a CMC member. Other CMC members include the 
Minister of Defense, Chief of  the General Staff; directors of the General Logistics Department 
and Gen eral Armaments Department; and commanders of the Air Force, Navy, and Second 
Artillery Force. These eight members report to th e CMC chairman through two vice -chairmen, 
who are currently GEN Fan Changlong and Xu Qiliang.  

 
32 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
CMC staff organizations may coordinate aspects of political warfare within the CMC 
itself, and with the PLA’s warfighting community. First, the CMC Gene ral Office, currently 
headed by former GPD Organization Department  Director MG Qin Shengxiang, wields 
considerable influence through management of day -to-day affairs of the CMC. Within the CMC 
General Office, the Comprehensive Investigation and Research Bureau (综合调研局) has enjoyed 
a traditionally close relationship with GPD/LD. The CMC Legal Affairs Bureau ( 法制局 ) 
participates in development of legal warfare theory.207 
As a side note, the CMC appears to manage its own platform for external political work. 
The China In ternational Cultural Communication Center  (CICCC) was established under CMC 
guidance in 1984, the same year as CAIFC, and has carried out a broad range of international 
and domestic initiatives. Its honorary leaders are retired military region -level politi cal 
commissars and public security authorities.208 The center’s executive director, Long Yuxiang (龙
宇翔; b. 1962) is a member of the CC PCC Foreign Relations Committee and Friendly Contact 
Sub-Committee.209 
GPD/LD’s association with the Ministry of National Defense (MND) is unclear. MND is 
under the dual leadership of the CMC and State Council, and functions as an external relations 
liaison platform with organizations both within the Chinese government and the international 
community. The Minister of Defense is a CMC member with a State Councilor grade. The MND 
Foreign Affairs Office (MND/FAO ) mission is “mi litary diplomacy.” It functions as the foreign 
affairs office  of both the CMC and GSD . Unofficial GPD/LD -managed exchanges augment 
official FAO-managed military-to-military relationships. Beyond this, some formal mechanism, 
such as a PLA foreign affairs le ading small group, likely exists to coordinate all facets of official 
and unofficial external affairs. 210 
GSD is responsible for day to day joint operations, intelligence, strategic planning and 
operational requirements, tr aining, and mobilization. In addit ion to its role in military 
diplomacy and security of senior party and state leadership, GSD concurrently  functions as a 
ground force headquarters staff.211 GSD includes two major components of the PLA intelligence 
system: the GSD Intelligence Department (GSD Second Department) and the GSD Technical 
Reconnaissance Department (GSD Third Department) , which is responsible for signals 
intelligence and cyber reconnaissance. The GSD Second Department, currently directed by MG 
Chen Youyi (陈友谊; b. 1954 ), is responsible for traditional collection and analysis, indications 
and warning, and order of battle.212 
Like any two organizations with some overlap in their 
missions, the relationship between GPD/LD and GSD Second 
Department is probably characterized by cooperation a nd 
competition. GPD second level department s, such as GPD/LD, are 
equal in grade to corps leader -level GSD counterparts, such as the 
GSD Operations Department (First Department), GSD Second 
Department, and GSD Third Department . Both GPD/LD and GSD 
Second D epartment appear to carry out clandestine human 
intelligence collection. However, the  Second Department’s collection 


 
33 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
priority may be information most relevant to military operations . GPD/LD likely prioritizes 
information that supports its political warfare  mission. GSD Second Department, GPD/LD, as 
well as MSS, likely overlap to some extent.213  
GSD academic platforms include the China Institute of International Strategic Studies 
(CIISS; 中国国 际战 略学会 ) and possibly the China Foundation for International Strategic 
Studies (FISS; 中国国际战略研究基金会). Formed in 1979, CIISS has traditionally been directed 
by the DCOGS with the intelligence and foreign affairs portfo lio. FISS was established in 1989.  
Its honorary chairmen include Cheng Siwei (成思危; 1935), other former senior NPC and CPPCC 
authorities, and former DCOGS Xiong Guangkai. Similar to counterparts in AMS and NDU, 
CIISS and FIIS are primarily  policy research and analysis organizations, with people’s 
diplomacy a  secondary mission. CAIFC, military region AIFCs, and CAPCC appear to execute 
policies. CPDS and similar centers subordinate to PLA military regions support GPD and CAIFC 
in their political warfare mission. In conducting foreign exchanges, CIISS and FIIS likely adhere 
to political guidelines established by the CMC and the GPD-managed political work system.214 
United Front System 
 
Among all the CCP communities, 
GPD/LD appears most closely aligned with 
the united front system. Drawing on the 
historical legacy of CCP successes in 
exploiting collaboration with ROC 
authorities in the 1920s and 1930s, GPD/LD 
political warfare appears integrated with 
united front work in order to win and 
sustain friends in support of a common 
cause.  
The CCPPC is the hig hest level entity 
overseeing the united front system. The 
CCPPC is a senior consultative body that exercises “democratic supervision” over non -CCP 
parties, mass organizations, and prominent personalities. It promotes political unity and social 
stability th rough controlled representation in China’s political, economic, social and cultural 
lives. The chairman of the CPPCC, currently Yu Z hengsheng (俞正声; b. 1945), is a member of 
the Politburo Standing Committee and serves as TALSG deputy director.  Twenty-three CCPPC 
vice chairmen represent CCP -approved parties, Hong Kong, Macau, autonomous regions, CCP 
International Department, and other organizations.215  
The CCP United Front Work Department ( UFWD) manages day -to-day tasks of the 
united front system. UFWD is currently directed by former CCP General Office director, Ling 
Jihua (令计划; b. 1956). UFWD’s five deputy directors have grades equal to a minister. 216 UFWD 
consists of functional bureaus  responsible for strategy development, liaison with approved 
political parties, minorities and approved religious organizations, and Taiwan, Ho ng Kong, and 
Macao issues. The united front system also includes  offices within provincial/municipal party 


 
34 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
committees. In at least one case, a GPD/LD officer appears to have been assigned as a division 
director within a provincial-level united front office.217 
CPPCC sub-committees are an important means of coordinating within the united front 
system. The directors of at least t hree key PLA organizations  – GPD/LD, GSD Second 
Department, and MND/FAO – coordinate foreign influence operations  with civilian 
counterparts through the CPPCC External Friendship Sub-Committee.218 Representatives from 
GPD/LD-affiliated associations at the provincial/municipal -level serve as provincial/municipal 
CPPCC members. UFWD also plays a role in providing guidance to the Office of Chinese 
Language Council International ( Hanban), which manages Confucian Institutes around the 
world.219 
GPD/LD works closely with eight CCP-approved democratic parties, and semi -retired 
“second line” authorities within the united front system. 220 According to a recent work report, 
non-CCP parties play a critical role in subordination of Taiwan to CCP authority. Perhaps most 
prominent are:  
 The China Democratic National Construction Association (CDNCA), which C heng Siwei  
chaired between December 1996 and 2007; 
 The China Association for Promoting Democracy  (CAPD), which Xu Jialu chaired between 
1997 and 2007.221  
 The KMT Revolutionary Committee , which has the second highest number of seats in the 
CPPCC (30%).222  
 The Taiwan Democratic Self -Government League  (referred to as Taimeng), which was 
formed in November 1947. The Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League has roots in the 
Taiwanese Communist Party, a chapter of the Communist Party of Japan that was formed in 
1928. Headquartered in Shanghai, Taimeng oversees the Cross-Strait Taiwanese Exchange 
Association.223 
CPPCC and UFWD also oversee a number of platforms for global outreach. One in 
particular that appears linked with GPD liaison work is the Chinese Council for Promotion of 
Peaceful National Reunification (CCPPR) , which was established in 1988 . The chairman of the 
CPPCC is dual -hatted as the CCPPR director.  Honorary chairmen include senior GPD/LD 
advisor Xu Jialu and Cheng Siwei. CCPPR deputy directors are vice -chairmen of the NPC 
Standing Committee and CPPCC . The CCPPR secretary general is dual hatted as UFWD deputy 
director. 224  CCPPR maintains offices in the United States , Japan, and elsewhere. Senior 
GPD/LD officer s regularly accompany senior CCPPR representatives in visits to the U.S.  225 
Other UFWD-affiliated platforms include: 
 National Society of Taiwan Studies. The National Society of Taiwan Studies  (NSTS), 
currently chaired by a CCPPR Honorary Chairman  Cheng Siwei, is an important entity that 
integrates some of China’s foremost Taiwan experts . NSTS supports the TALSG Office, 
UFWD, China Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), MSS, and presumably GPD/LD.226  

 
35 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 Huangpu Military Academy Alumni Association.  Established along with CAIFC in 1984, 
Huangpu Association events have i ncluded senior GPD/LD representatives during even ts 
with retired ROC military officers since 1986.227  
 All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots.  Established on December 22, 1981, the All -
China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots  (Tailian) promotes unification among Taiwanese 
individuals and groups in China and abroad. Tailian, GPD/LD, and the TAO have 
cooperated on Taiwan-related propaganda efforts since 2002.228 
 China Overseas Friendship Association.  The China Overseas Friendship Association 
(COFA), overseen by the UFWD director, is a platform for exchanges w ith overseas 
Chinese.229 
 Council for Promotion of Chinese Strategic Culture. A relatively new organization likely 
affiliated with the united front system is the Council for Promotion of Chinese Strategic 
Culture. Established January 2011, the Council’s direc tor is Zheng Wantong  (郑万通; b. 
1941), who previously served as deputy director of UFWD and CPPCC vice chairman. MG 
(ret) Luo Yuan (罗援; b. 1950 ), a respected former senior authority of the PLA Academy of 
Military Science  (AMS), is dual -hatted as the Council’s executive deputy d irector and 
secretary general.230  
As a final note, one other organization that appears to play a prominent role in Taiwan -
related united front work is the Shanghai East Asian Institute. Formed six months after Jiang 
Zemin’s January 1995 Eight Point Proposal o n cross-Strait unification, the Shanghai East Asian 
Institute’s director, Zhang Nianchi ( 章念驰; b. 1942), is the grandson of Zhang Taiyan and is a 
former director of the Shanghai City Taiwan Research Institute. Scholars associated with the 
East Asian Institute appear to be linked with the Shanghai Institutes for International Studies  
and the Shanghai Society of Taiwan Studies . In addition  to a research committee, s ubordinate 
offices under the Shanghai East Asian Institute include the Regional Security Research Lab ( 区
域安全研究室) and Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau Youth Research Lab ( 台港澳青少年研究室), 
which carries out sociological studies.231 
CCP Propaganda System 
 
As the PLA’s executive agent for psychological warfare, GPD/LD is part of the CCP’s 
propaganda and ideology system. Broad perception management policies are coordinated by the 
Central Leading Group for Propaganda and Ideological Work (CLGPIW). Under the direction of 
a member of the Politburo Standing Committee, the CLGPIW consists of one or two deputy 
directors and between five and eight members.232  
The CCP Propaganda Department  (CCP/PD) functions as the nerve center of the 
propaganda system. The propaganda system integrates the work of the PLA , Ministry of 
Education, Ministry of Culture, China Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), People’s Daily  
(Renmin Ribao), New China News Agency  (Xinhua), and the State Administration for Radio, 
Film, and Television (SARFT) . As an example of overlap between the party and state, t he 

 
36 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Minister of Culture, Minister of Education, and SARFT director are dual hat ted as CCP /PD 
deputy directors.233  
The CLGPIW and CCP /PD influence  the perceptions of foreign audiences through the 
Central External Propaganda Office, which also functions as the State Council Information 
Office. The director of the External Propaganda Office is dual hatted as deputy director of the 
CCP/PD.234 As noted by George Washington University professor David Shambaugh, external 
propaganda work publicizes Chinese government policies and perspectives, promotes Chinese 
culture around the world, counters foreign criticism perceived as hostile (eg., the so -called 
“China Threat Theory”), and advances cross-Strait unification.  External propaganda also is 
intimately linked with united front work  (eg., CPPCC), non-governmental platforms such as 
CAIFC, and with programs managed by the Ministry of Education, such as Confucius 
Institutes.235 A CCP Taiwan Propaganda Leading Small Group reportedly coordinates Taiwan -
specific perception management activities across relevant party, state, and military 
communities.236 
A senior GPD officer traditionally has represented the PLA  on the CLGPIW. As of 
October 2013, GPD Deputy Director GEN Du Jincai most likely fills this position. He also serves 
as the PLA representative on the CCP Political and Legal Committee . In addition, Du Jincai 
chairs the PLA External Propaganda Leading Small Group, whic h the CCP and CMC established 
in 2006 to coordinate across the military bureaucracy.  The GPD Propaganda Department 
External Propaganda Bureau, which was formed in 2007, functions as the leading small group’s 
standing office. It also functions as the MND International Communication Bureau.237  
The division of effort between the external propaganda b ureaus of GPD Propaganda 
Department and GPD/LD remains unclear. Both appear to engage in “public opinion warfare.” 
One speculative hypothesis is that that the GPD E xternal Propaganda Bureau is responsible for 
“white” propaganda in the form of public diplomacy, including management of routine 
dissemination platforms and content. GPD/LD may be responsible for “gray,” “black ,” and 
Taiwan-related propaganda. The GPD/LD T aiwan Bureau supports the Central External 
Propaganda Office through representation on a Taiwan-focused central broadcast program 
committee.238 GPD/LD also presents annual awards to PLA units excelling in Taiwan -related 
propaganda.239 
External Affairs System 
 
In addition to its propaganda mission, GPD supports the CCP’s external affairs system in 
a subdued yet important manner . “People’s diplomacy” and friendship associations augment 
traditional state-to-state diplomacy and military-to-to military relations . Foreign and national 
security policies  are coordinated through the Foreign Affairs Leading Small Group (FA LSG), 
which is chaired by the CCP General Secretary. The FALSG operates in parallel with a National 
Security Small Leading Group, which is appears to co nsist of the same members. The FALSG 
Office is directed by a State Counci lor-grade official. A CMC member – the Minister of Defense 
– has traditionally been an FALSG member. His CMC grade offers a status slightly higher than 
other FALSG members who carry a minister-level civil service grade. The DCOGS responsible 
for foreign affairs and intelligence has also represented the PLA on the FALSG. Other members 

 
37 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
are believed to include the director of the CCP Inte rnational (Liaison) Department, and leaders 
of the  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Commerce, MSS, and Ministry of Public 
Security.240 
Senior GPD/LD officers coordinate with FALSG members, as well as serving and retired 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs cadre, via CAIFC and other associations. For example, retired senior 
MOFA officials, such as Huang Hua, Li Zhaoxing, Zhang Deguang, and Yang Zhenya have served 
in honorific positions of CAIFC. 241 GPD/LD officers allegedly have been anchored with MOFA 
for embassy assignments. 242  CAIFC, discussed above, is representative of the “people’s 
diplomacy” component of the external affairs system.  
CAIFC was modeled upon the Chinese People's Association for Friendship with Foreign 
Countries (CPAFFC). CPAFFC is an outgrowth of the Chinese People’s Committee for Defending 
World Peace  (Peace Committee) and the Chinese People’s Association for Cultural Exchange, 
which were established in 1949 and 1954 respectively.  A senior PLA enemy work officer who 
played a critical role in the final phase of the Chinese Civil War, Liu Guan yi, served as an initial 
Peace Committee secretary general.243 Until the emergence of CAIFC and other platforms in the 
1980s, the Peace Committee and CPAFFC dominated the people -to-people component of 
China’s foreign policy.244  
Today, CPAFFC is directed by Li Xiaolin ( 李小林; b. 1953 ), the bright and personable 
daughter of former PRC Pre sident Li Xiannian ( 李先念; 1909-1992) and wife of NDU Political 
Commissar GEN Liu Yazhou.245 CPAFFC oversees the China Friendship Foundation for Peace 
and Development (CFFPD), which ha s advocated greater emphasis on public diplomacy, 
presumably as an alternative to political warfare. 246  CFFPD maintains an affiliation with 
Charhar Institute, a leading public diplomacy platform. Another organization likely supporting 
public diplomacy is the China International Public Relations Association (CIPRA).247 
GPD/LD plays a more pronounced in the execution of policies coordinated by the Taiwan 
affairs system. As previously discussed, GPD/LD has had a visible presence within the TALSG 
Office, although its relative degree of influence appears to have ebbed and flowed over the years. 
The TALSG , in large part on the CMC’s behalf,  has been  responsible for coordinating the 
implementation of the Politburo’s Taiwan policy.248 The government designation of the TALSG 
Office is the State Council Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO). MG Yang Side was a dominant presence 
within the TALSG Office  from the late 1970s to 1993 . He departed along with Yang Shangkun 
and GPD Director Yang Baibing. The last known GPD/LD officer assigned to a senior TAO 
position was MG Li Qingzhou, allegedly a corps -leader grade officer serving as assistant to the 
director. In 1995, Li  Qingzhou rotated out of the TAO and was assigned as mishu within the 
office of the Fujian provincial governor.249  
While its formal presence diminished in the 1990s, GPD/LD officers appear to maintain 
close links with the TALSG Office. For example, senior GPD/LD officers have accompanied TAO 
deputy director - and bureau -level authorities for confere nces overseas, and frequently  are 
highlighted as a keynote speaker alongsi de TAO counterparts.250 GPD/LD authorities also have 
been central players in cross -Strait academic and retired officer exchanges. In addition to 

 
38 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
participating in TAO-affiliated events, GPD/LD is represented in an expert working group 
responsible for development of broad Taiwan-focused propaganda policies.251 
GPD/LD also maintains an ambiguous affiliation with the CCP International 
Department, which is responsible for party -to-party relations around the world.  Formed  in 
1951, the CCP International Liaison Department ( CCP/ILD) was initially responsible for 
promoting Marxist-Leninist ideology and managing relations with Comintern members. During 
the Cultural Revolution, CCP/ILD was staffed in large part by the CID and PLA. Over the years, 
CCP/ILD expanded its scope to include interactions with a broad array of political parties and 
has played a leading role in China’s relations with North Korea. Prominent figures who have 
directed the CCP International Department  include Geng Biao (1971 -1979), Ji Pengfei (1979 -
1982), and Dai Bingguo (1997 -2003). Its principle platform for exchanges is the China 
Association for International Understanding (CAFIU), which was formed in 1981.252 
As a final note, implying a need to improve coordination among various components of 
the CCP external affairs system, Yang Jiechi argued in August 2013:253 
 
To better coordinate the country's domestic and international agenda, the Party Central 
Committee attaches great importance to a holistic management o f foreign affairs. It 
calls for balanced considerations, overall planning, unified command and coordinated 
implementation. It requires the central and local governments, non -governmental 
organizations and all foreign -related agencies to work together to fo rm synergy, with 
each performing their respective functions. We should fully motivate all the parties 
involved and spark their creativity, and at the same time subject their activities to the 
unified management guided by national interests.  
 
State Security System 
 
GPD also appears to have a symbiotic relationship with the state sec urity system. The 
state security system is managed by the Central Political -Legal Committee. In years past, the 
secretary of the Political -Legal Committee was a member of the Pol itburo Standing Committee. 
In 2012, however, the secretary position was downgraded to Politburo member level. The deputy 
secretary carries a State Councilor rank and is dual hat ted as Minister of Public Security. GPD 
Deputy Director GEN Du Jincai serves as  the PLA representative on the Central Political Legal 
Committee. The commander of the People’s Armed  Police (PAP) is also a member, as well  as 
Minister of State Security and senior representatives of the justice system.254 
Given common roots tracing back to  the 1930s, GPD liaison work and MSS operations 
may sometimes be indistinguishable. The MSS was formed in June 1983 through the merger of 
the CID and counterintelligence elements of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS). 255 MSS 
collects, analyzes, and report s intelligence through overt and clandestine means. It promotes 
CCP ideals and policies. Before 1979, the CCP’s state security system also managed day to day 
Taiwan policy affairs.256  
Like other foreign intelligence services, MSS may manipulate internationa l perceptions, 
and discredit foreign government policies deemed threatening to Chinese interests. 257 However, 
a preliminary review of publicly available data offers few indications of a dedicated influence 
operations organization within the MSS. One exceptio n may be the MSS propaganda bureau , 

 
39 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
which may e ngage in clandestine operations – although its scope of responsibility is 
uncertain. 258  Advocates have proposed establishing an MSS bureau dedicated to active 
measures. MSS foreign exchange platforms include the  China Institute s of Contemporary 
International Relations (CICIR) and the China International Culture Exchange Center 
(CICEC).259 

 
40 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
CONCLUSION  
 
 
 
All governments seek to shape the international environment in accordance with 
national interests. Exercised w hen overt public diplomacy is insufficient by itself, political 
warfare is the employment of instruments of national power – short of war – to achieve foreign 
policy goals. Political warfare seeks to reframe perceptions of objective reality. The importance 
of political warfare in the PRC’s approach to foreign affairs international relations stems from 
the authoritarian nature of its political system. Chinese political  warfare seeks to shore up 
legitimacy domestically, reframe international rules of the road, and promote alternatives to 
widely accepted universal values.  This study offers a tentative baseline for understanding the 
potential role of organized political warfare in PRC security policy, its relevance in evaluating 
intentions and capabilities, and in assessing its effectiveness.  
GPD/LD evolved from Civil War-era enemy work and liaison work, which sowed dissent 
among enemies, consolidated links with friends within a united front, and strived to win over 
those in the middle. Guided by the doctrinal pri nciple of “aligning with friends and 
disintegrating enemies,” contemporary political warfare augments people-to-people, 
government-to-government, and party -to-party relations to promote CCP political legitimacy 
and defend against perceived threats to state security. GPD liaison work develops and sustains 
rapport with international elites, targets the integrity of coalitions and individuals perceived as 
inimical to PRC interests. 
GPD/LD and affiliated platforms play critical roles in reframing broader concep ts of 
world order and undermining the political legitimacy of elected leaders on Taiwan . At the 
strategic level, a core PLA political warfare mission is countering perceived political challenges 
that liberal democratic systems , universal values, and Wester n culture pose to CCP legitimacy  
within China itself and the broader international community . Contemporary CCP anxiety is 
rooted in part in former U.S. Secretary of State John Dulles’s promotion in 1953 for “peaceful 
evolution,” rather than military violence, to promote individual liberty around the world.260  
As an example of recent anxiety, Hu Jintao warned in a January 2012 Qiushi editorial 
that international hostile forces are waging cultural and ideological warfare “to Westernize and 
divide China.”261 The United States in particular is singled out as an ideological adversary . A 
January 2013 Renmin Ribao editorial noted, “after the torch  of Western civilization was passed 
to the United  States, universal values have been used more frequently to ensure U.S. 
hegemony.262 
As a result, CCP leaders undertake active measures to shape the international system in 
its image in order to ensure state security. The “China model” of authoritarian development is 
marketed as an alternative to the Western model of liberal democ racy. As former Hudson 
Institute scholar Christopher Ford noted  in a n August 2013  presentation, Chinese analysts 
believe that the U.S. and Western countries have dictated the normative order of the 

 
41 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
international system. Senior CCP leaders seek  to r eshape t he global order in  a manner more 
consistent with Chinese interests. Economic, cultural, political and military power , guided by 
doctrinal concepts such as the “Three Warfares,”  is critical for expanding and strengthening 
PRC global influence and mitigating challenges to political legitimacy.263  
While the United States is viewed as an 
ideological adversary, Taiwan remains the 
central focus of PLA political warfare. GPD/LD 
is a principle combatant in a coercive persuasion 
campaign intended to reframe internat ional 
perceptions of “One China” and undermine 
Taiwan’s legitimacy within the international 
community.  
The objective reality is that Taiwan, 
under its current ROC constitutional framework, exists as an independent, sovereign state. The 
two equally legitim ate governments – the PRC and ROC – are currently committed to One 
China principles, under which they exercise exclusive administrative jurisdiction over the 
territory under their respective control, with neither side subordinate to the other. In the 
context of the U.S. "One China" policy, a “One China, Two Governments” framework may serve 
as the most accurate representation of the status quo in the Taiwan Strait. 
However, from Beijing’s perspective, Taiwan’s democratic government – an alternative 
to mainla nd China’s authoritarian model – presents an existential challenge to the CCP’s 
monopoly on domestic political power. With political legitimacy in the Taiwan Strait viewed as a 
zero-sum game, authorities in Beijing have long sought the political subordinat ion of Taiwan 
under a “One Country, Two Systems” principle.  The resolution of cross -Strait differences is 
constrained without broad acknowledgement if not recognition of the ROC’s legitimacy within 
the international community.  264 In the near term, GPD/LD ap pears focused on creating the 
conditions for early initiation of cross -Strait political negotiations on terms favorable to the 
CCP. 
GPD/LD functions as an interlocking directorate that synchronizes relevant party 
organs, state bureaucracies, military commu nities, commercial enterprises, and informal 
networks of prominent elites. In performing its mission, GPD/LD leverages a diverse set of non-
governmental platforms in performing its mission. Organizations such as CAIFC and CAPCC 
appear under direct GPD/LD management. Other platforms with GPD links are more opaque. A 
stridently anti-American platform – the Dongfang Yi Cultural Expansion Association – appears 
to support GPD in development of concepts associated with “Three Warfares” and advance 
Chinese nation alism. Themes promoted by other platforms, such as the China Energy Fund 
Committee and Nishan Forum, include the d e-ideologization of state -to-state relations  and 
commonalities among the world’s civilizations and cultures.  While all support GPD’s political  
warfare mission, themes propagated by associations such as Dongfang Yi stand in sharp contrast 
to other non -governmental organizations calling for cultural unity among the world’s 
civilizations.265 


 
42 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Under the principle of “using foreign strength to propagand ize for China,” GPD/LD 
seeks to build and sustain friendly relations with prominent opinion leaders who may be willing 
and capable of influencing public discourse in a manner conducive to Beijing’s political-military 
interests. GPD/LD leverages organic int elligence, and likely is a prominent consumer of 
intelligence produced by MSS , GSD Second Department , and GSD Third Department signals 
intelligence and cyber reconnaissance.  Operating at a nexus of politics, finance, military 
operations, and intelligence, GPD/LD amplifies or attenuates the political effects of the military  
instrument of national power. 
Based on preliminary social network analysis, senior personalities with no apparent 
formal party, government, or military position appear integral to the CCP ’s political warfare 
strategy. For example, former NPC Vice Chairman Xu Jialu was a driving force behind 
establishment of Confucius Institutes around the world . Today, he serves as a senior CAIFC 
advisor and chairs the PLA’s principle cross -Strait platform – GPD/LD’s China Association f or 
Promotion of Chinese Culture . He presides over the Nishan Forum on World Civilizations , and 
chairs the China Energy Fund Committee’s advisory board and Institute of Culture. He also is 
honorary chairman of the UFWD’s China  Council for Promotion of Peaceful National 
Reunification. Xu Jialu is also known for being one of the first to advance the notion that 
generals on both sides of the Taiwan Strait are Chinese military officers.266 
Because public information is limited, asses sments regarding the effectiveness of PLA 
political warfare can be a speculative endeavor. Measures of effectiveness are inherently 
subjective. A detailed understanding of GPD/LD is complicated by extensive use of pseudonyms 
and multiple associations of it s senior members . While its infrastructure targeting Taiwan 
appears expansive, at least one assessment noted the limited effectiveness of Chinese 
propaganda over the past several decades. 267 Regardless, autocratic regimes, in comparison to 
democracies, may e njoy a relative advantage in the ability to mobilize and focus resources 
needed to manipulate perceptions and influence foreign policies.  
PLA political warfare shares common roots with the former Soviet Union. Similar to the 
former Soviet Union, the CCP a ugments diplomacy with active measures in order to influence 
perceptions of foreign audiences and policies. A prominent characteristic of Soviet active 
measures program was centralization and integration under the KGB. By contrast, no single 
authority, wit h the exception of the Politburo Standing Committee , appears to enjoy an 
exclusive monopoly over  political warfare. Civilian bureaucracies, such as the UFWD , External 
Propaganda Office, CCP/ID, and the MSS all appear to play a role. 
GPD/LD’s ability to bri dge various communities within China’s fragmented system 
should not be overestimated. The degree of control that GPD or other propaganda -related 
organizations exercise over domestic opinion leaders and bureaucracies remains uncertain. 
Absolute control over information and economic activity is neither possible nor necessary. GPD 
likely guides or manages relevant discourse, perhaps selectively suppressing or reshaping news 
and information as required. The system likely relies u pon informal corporatist rules , where 
actors may operate with significant autonomy  within set limits. Loyalty to the ruling party may 
be rewarded and those who contradict party lines may be punished.268 

 
43 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
Finally, U.S. policy makers may find value in a reinvigorated capacity to counter those 
who promote visions for an international order that are contrary to American interests and 
ideals. Citing the stagnation of U.S. political warfare skills since the end of the Cold War, 
prominent opinion leaders have indeed advocated in favor of enhancing our ability to win hearts 
and minds in the Middle East context. China’s experience in political warfare may be instructive 
as well.269 

 
44 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author Biographies 
Mark A. Stokes is the Executive Director of the Project 2049 Institute. A twenty -year U.S. Air Force veteran, 
Lieutenant Colonel (ret) Stokes served as Team Chief and Senior Country Director for the People’ s Republic of 
China, Taiwan, and Mongolia in the Office of the Secretary of Defense . He also was a ssistant air attaché at the 
U.S. Defense Attaché Office in Beijing and served as a signals intelligence officer at Clark AB, Philippines and in 
West Berlin, Germany. Prior to co -founding Project 2049, he was Vice President and Taiwan Country Manager 
for Raytheon International. He has served as Executive Vice President of Laifu Trading Company, a subsidiary 
of the Rehfeldt Group; and was a member of the Board of  Governors of the American Chamber of Commerce in 
Taiwan. He holds a BA from Texas A&M University and graduate degrees in International Relations and Asian 
Studies from Boston University and the Naval Postgraduate School. He has working proficiency in Mandarin. 
Russell Hsiao  is a Non Resident Senior Fellow with the Project 2049 Institute. He was the Editor of China 
Brief at The Jamestown Foundation from October 2007 -July 2011. Prior to that, he served as a Special 
Associate/Program Officer in the Internatio nal Cooperation Department at the Taiwan Foundation for 
Democracy in Taipei, and a Researcher at The Heritage Foundation. Mr. Hsiao received his B.A in International 
Studies from the American University's School of International Service and the University Honors Program. He 
is a member of the Young Leaders' Program of the Honolulu -based think tank Pacific Forum CSIS. Mr. Hsiao is 
proficient in Mandarin Chinese and learning Korean. 

 
45 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIFC Association for International Friendly Contact 
AMS Academy of Military Sciences 
BAIFC Beijing Association for International Friendly Contact 
CAIFC China Association for International Friendly Contact 
CAFIU China Association for International Understanding 
CAPCC China Association for Promotion of Chinese Culture 
CAPD China Association for Promoting Democracy 
CASS China Academy of Social Sciences 
CCP Chinese Communist Party 
CCP/ID CCP International Department 
CCP/ILD CCP International Liaison Department 
CCP/PD CCP Propaganda Department 
CCPPNR China Council for Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification 
CDNCA China Democratic National Construction Association 
CEFC China Energy Fund Committee 
CFFPD China Friendship Foundation for Peace and Development 
CHBC China Huayi Broadcasting Corporation 
CICCC China International Cultural Communication Center 
CICEC China International Culture Exchange Center 
CICIR China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations 
CID Central Investigation Department 
CIISS China Institute of International Strategic Studies 
CLGPIW Central Leading Group for Propaganda and Ideological Work 
CMC Central Military Commission 
COFA China Overseas Friendship Association 
CPAFC China Painting Academy for Friendly Contact 
CPIFA Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs 
CPDS Center for Peace and Development Studies 
CPPCC Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 
CPVA Chinese People’s Volunteer Army 
CUSEF China-U.S. Exchange Foundation 
DCOGS Deputy Chief of the General Staff 
FALSG Foreign Affairs Leading Small Group 
FISS China Foundation for International Strategic Studies 
GAIFC Guangdong Association for International Friendly Contact 
GEN General (rank) 
GAD General Armaments Department 
GLD General Logistics Department 
GPD General Political Department 
GSD General Staff Department 
GPD/LD General Political Department Liaison Department 
ILD International Liaison Department 
JAIFC Jiangsu Association for International Friendly Contact 
LTG Lieutenant General (rank) 
MG Major General (rank) 
MND Ministry of National Defense 

 
46 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
MND/FAO MND Foreign Affairs Office 
MPS Ministry of Public Security 
MR Military Region 
MSS Minister of State Security 
NDU National Defense University 
NPC National People’s Congress 
NSTS National Society of Taiwan Studies 
PLA People’s Liberation Army 
PLAAF PLA Air Force 
ROC Republic of China (Taiwan) 
SARFT State Administration for Radio, Film, and Television 
TALSG Taiwan Affairs Leading Small Group 
SAIFC Shanghai Association for International Friendly Contact 
SCOL Senior Colonel (rank) 
TAO Taiwan Affairs Office 
UFWD United Front Work Department 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization 
VTS Voice of the Taiwan Strait 
 
 

 
47 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
 
ENDNOTES 
 
                                                        
1 The authors wish to thank John Corbett and other reviewers who offered useful comments and suggestions on 
earlier drafts. All errors are the responsibility of the authors alone. 
 
2 Li Yan, "Implementing ‘Four Transformations’ in Peacetime Political Mobilization,” China Military Online, May 7, 
2012, at http://chn.chinamil.com.cn/yby/2012-05/07/content_4854257.htm. 
 
3 In accordance with the PRC’s 1982 constitution, a state CMC also exists under the authority of the National People’s 
Congress (NPC) that is equal in status to the State Council. In reality and like many similar organs in China’s party-
state system, the party CMC and state CMC are the same organization with two signs (一个机构,两个牌子) with the 
CMC party status carrying the most weight. 
 
4 Among various sources outlining the mishu system, see Cheng Li, “The Mishu Phenomenon: Patron-Client Ties and 
Coalition-Building Tactics,” China Leadership Monitor, No 4, October 30, 2002, at 
http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/clm4_lc.pdf; Wen-Hsuan Tsai, “Behind the Veil of the CCP’s 
Mishu System: Operation, Functions, and the Role of Informal Politics,” presentation at Academica Sinica Institute of 
Political Science (Taiwan), February 21, 2013, posted online at 
http://icaps.nsysu.edu.tw/ezfiles/122/1122/img/1513/(50)1.pdf; and James C. Mulvenon and Michael S. Chase, “The 
Role of Mishus in the Chinese Political System: Change and Continuity,” in Chinese Leadership in the Twenty-first 
Century: The Rise of the Fourth Generation, ed. David M. Finkelstein and Maryanne Kivlehan (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. 
Sharpe, 2002). 
 
5 Among various sources, see J. Michael Waller, Strategic Influence: Public Diplomacy, Counterpropaganda, and 
Political Warfare (Wash DC: Institute of World Politics Press, 2008). 
 
6 “What is Public Diplomacy?,” USC Center for Public Diplomacy, at 
http://uscpublicdiplomacy.org/index.php/about/what_is_pd/.  
 
7 J. Michael Waller, "Getting Serious About Strategic Influence," Journal of International Security Affairs, Fall 2009, 
p. 24. 
 
8 Paul A. Smith, Jr., On Political Warfare (Wash DC: National Defense University Press, 1989), p. 3. 
 
9 Paul Seabury and Angelo Codevilla, War: Ends and Means (New York: Basic Books Publishing, 1989), 160-161. 
 
10 Joint Pub 1-02, "DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” 8 August 2006. 
 
11 Peter Callamari and Derek Reveron, “China's Use of Perception Management,” International Journal of 
Intelligence and Counterintelligence, Vol 16, Issue 1, 2003, pp. 1-15. 
 
12 Christopher Simpson, The Science of Coercion: Communication Research and Psychological Warfare 1945-1960 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), p. 24. For insights into Chinese psychological warfare, see Timothy L. 
Thomas, “New Developments in Chinese Strategic Psychological Warfare,” Special Warfare, April 2003, at 
http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/fmso/chinesepsyop.pdf; and Military Information Support Operations, Joint 
Pub 3-13.2, Department of Defense, December 20, 2011. 
 
13 J. Michael Waller (ed), Strategic Influence: Public Diplomacy, Counterpropaganda, and Political Warfare (Wash 
DC: Institute Of World Politics Press, 2008), at http://jmw.typepad.com/files/strategicinfluenceclass_copy.pdf; and 
Leonard Loob, “Goebbel’s Principles of Propaganda,” Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 3, Autumn 1950, pp. 
419-442. 
 
14 See “Soviet Active Measures in the "Post-Cold War" Era, 1988-1991,” Report Prepared at the Request of the United 
States House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations by the United States Information Agency, June 1992, 
at http://intellit.muskingum.edu/russia_folder/pcw_era/index.htm#Contents. Also see Soviet Influence Activities: A 
Report on Active Measures and Propaganda, 1986-1987 (Washington, DC: Department of State, August 1987); and 
John Lenczowski, “Political-Ideological Warfare in Integrated Strategy, and its Basis in an Assessment of Soviet 
Reality,” in Katharine C. Gorka and Patrick Sookhdeo (eds.), Fighting the Ideological War: Winning Strategies from 
Communism to Islamism (McLean, VA: Isaac Publishing, 2012), at http://iwppassport.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/Lenczowski-John-Political-Ideological-Warfare-Chapter.pdf. 

 
48 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
15 For background on the Central Special Work Committee (中央特别工作委员会) and Social Work Department, see 
Song Yuehong,“The Little Known Central Investigation Department” (鲜为人知的“中央调查部”), CCP News, July 19, 
2010, at http://dangshi.people.com.cn/GB/85039/12178020.html. 
 
16 Among various sources, see “Beiping Secret War of 3376 Underground Party Members” (3376 位地下党员暗战北平), 
CCP News Network, July 5, 2011, at http://dangshi.people.com.cn/GB/85039/15080203.html. (延安中央社会部旧址
修复竣工 向社会公众免费开放), Xinhua, October 30, 2009, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/travel/2009-
10/30/content_12359005.htm. As a core of underground work (地下工作), Kang Sheng (康生; 1898-1975) directed 
the Social Work Department (社会部). Supporting Kang Sheng were deputy directors Kong Yuan (孔原; 1906-1990), 
Pan Hannian (潘汉年; 1906-1977), and Li Kenong (李克农; 1899-1962). The Social Work Department, which included  
international communist movements (国际共运) work in its portfolio, was folded into the Ministry of Public Security 
in 1949. See Guo Xuezhi, p. 71. The Urban Work Department (城工部), at least to some extent, evolved into today’s 
United Front Work Department. For background on the CCP international communist movement activities, see 
“Exploring the Path of the CCP and International Communist Movement” (中共与国际共运的探索之路), Xinhua, June 
21, 2011, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/herald/2011-06/21/c_13933387.htm.  
 
17 Another second level department, the GPD Traitor Elimination Department (锄奸部), theoretically could be 
considered to have engaged in covert underground work. The organization was responsible for rooting out 
intelligence operatives and other security risks. The Traitor Elimination Department evolved into the GPD Security 
Department. See K. M. Lawson, “The Enemy and Puppet Work Bureau in Shandong,” at 
http://www.froginawell.net/china/2012/06/winning-over-the-puppets-intro/. Chinese for Enemy Work Section is 敌
军工作科. 
 
18 For an excellent historical accounts of enemy work and the Enemy Work Department (敌军工作部; or 敌工部 for 
short), see K. M. Lawson, Winning Over and Reforming the Puppet Armies of Shandong, China, 1937-1947; Dai 
Yugang (戴玉刚), Secret War in the Taihang Mountains (太行山上的秘密战), undated, at 
http://bz.ccxtd.com.cn/shtml/szbz1/20121218/157827.shtml; Xu Zehao, From Captives to Comrades: 
Commemorating Enemy Work of the Eight Route Army and New Fourth Army (从俘虏到战友：记八路军 新四军的
敌军工作) (Hefei: Anhui People’s Press, 2005), at http://book.ln.chaoxing.com/ebook/detail_11531096.html; Zhang 
Yanbo, (抗战前期八路军对日军的宣传战研究), China-Japan Network, August 10, 2011, at 
http://www.sjhistory.net/site/newxh/yjzt8-3mb_a2011081037171.htm; and Edward C. O’Dowd, Chinese Military 
Strategy in the Third Indochina War: The Last Maoist War (New York: Routledge Press, 2007), pp. 22-23. Major 
Eighth Route Army units included the 115th, 120th, and 129th Divisions. After 1941, the New Fourth Army included the 
1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Divisions. Wang Hongqing (汪洪清; 1911-1990) had briefly directed the New Fourth 
Army Enemy Work Department. In 1937, Pan Zhenwu (潘振武; 1908-1988) directed the 115th Division Enemy Work 
Department and was succeeded by Wang Liren (王立人; 1910-1941) and Shi Xinan (石新安; 1907-1978). Zhang Zizhen 
directed the 115th Division Enemy Work Department by 1943, and continued in the position after its conversion to the 
Shandong MR Enemy Work Department. Deng Xiaoping was political commissar of the 129th Division. Directors of 
the 129th Enemy Work Department included Zeng Chuanliu (曾传六; 1904-1983); Xiang Benli (项本立; 1911-1964); 
and Zhang Xiangshan (张香山; 1904-1999). Zhang Xiangshan eventually became deputy director of the Eight Route 
Army (Field) Enemy Work Department. Under leadership of Gan Siqi (甘泗淇; 甘泗奇; 1903-1964), 120th Division 
Enemy Work Department directors included: Wu Xi (吴西; 1900-2005), Chen Zhong (陈钟; 1903-1982), and He Hui 
(何辉; 1911-1996). Xie Zhenhua (谢振华; 1916-2011) was a GPD Enemy Work Department deputy director. 
  
19 Liu Guanli eventually became East China Military Region Political Department Enemy Work Department director. 
For reference to Li Zhifu, see “Li Zhifu: Making Enemy Work the First Line Against the Japanese” (林植夫：把敌军工
作做到对日作战第一线), CCP News Network, October 26, 2012, at 
http://www.haijiangzx.com/2012/celebrity_1026/30661.html. Qi Kechang (漆克昌; 1910-1988), was also educated in 
Japan, directed the Eighth Route Army (Field) Enemy Work Department, and the Second Field Army’s political work 
department after 1949. Yang Songqing (杨松青; 1903-1977) was Second Field Army Political Department Enemy 
Work Department director.  
 
20 For reference to the Japanese Worker and Peasant School in Yan’an, see “How the Eight Route Army Reformed 
Japanese POWs during the War of Resistance” (八路军抗战中如何改造日军战俘), Xinhua, August 17, 2010, at 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/theory/2010-08/17/c_12453489_3.htm. A founder of the Japanese Communist Party, 
Nosaka Sanzo, directed the school on behalf of the GPD and Enemy Work Department leadership.  

 
49 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
21 Among various sources, see Wang Jianying, “Structure and Change in Eighth Route Army and CMC Political Work” 
(八路军和中共中央军委政治工作机构的演变), Studies on the Anti-Japanese War, February 1994, pp. 109-120, at 
http://jds.cass.cn/UploadFiles/zyqk/2010/12/201012141650291802.pdf; “Eighth Route Army History, November 
1938” (八路军简史,  1938 年 11 月), Eight Route Army Taihang Memorial Hall website, March 23, 2010, at 
http://www.balujun.org/blsh/bljs/1610.html. Also see “Central Committee Instructions Regarding Expanding 
Friendships with Friendly Militaries” (中央关于对友军扩大交朋友工作的指示), Theoretical Political Learning, August 
19, 1940, at http://202.198.141.11/lsdd/lsddview.asp?id=18078. Liu Jian (刘型; 1906-1981), who initially directed the 
Enemy Work Section, took over the GPD Liaison Department Friendly Military Section. In 1940, Tan Zheng replaced 
Wang Ruofei upon the latter’s assignment to direct the CCP Secretariat. Wang Ruofei was part of a team negotiating a 
political settlement with KMT leaders in April 1946. Wang, along with Ye Ting (叶挺; 1896-1946), Bo Gu (博古; 1907-
1946), Deng Fa (邓发; 1906-1946), and others, died in a plane crash while flying from Chungqing to Yan’an. After 
establishment of the CCP Northeast Bureau in August 1945, Zou Dapeng had become director of a Liaison 
Department under bureau’s cognizance. 
 
22 See K. M. Lawson, “The Enemy and Puppet Work Bureau in Shandong,” at 
http://www.froginawell.net/china/2012/06/winning-over-the-puppets-intro/. Also see “Developing Enemy Work” 
(开展敌工工作), Yuncheng Party History, at http://www.yandu.gov.cn/ztjd90/ShowArticle.asp?ArticleID=43585. 
 
23 Yan Ming, “CCP Subversion and KMT Uprising During the Liberation War Period” (解放战争时期中共策反与国民党
军起义), Party History Research and Teaching (党史研究与教学), June 2008, at 
http://www.hprc.org.cn/pdf/DSYJ200806010.pdf. 
 
24 Cai Xiaoqian (蔡孝乾; 蔡孝干; 1908-1982) used Cai Qian (蔡乾/蔡前) and Yang Ming (杨明) as pseudonyms. Among 
multiple sources referencing the Taiwan Work Committee, see “Communist China’s ‘Taiwan Provincial Committee’ 
Incident” (中共“台湾省工委”事件), Huaxia Jingwei, June 5, 2003, at 
http://www.huaxia.com/lasd/twzlk/zzsj/2003/06/475247.html. 
 
25 The PLA Third Field Army’s Ninth Corps had primary responsibility for deliberate planning. Wu Xian (吴宪; 1915-
2001), father of PLA Navy Commander ADM Wu Shengli, was deputy director of the New Fourth Army Fourth 
Division Enemy Work Department. He then directed the Third Field Army Political Department Enemy 
Work/Liaison Department. Chen Zesheng (陈泽生) and Hong Youqiao (洪幼樵; or 刘志敬) served as CCP Taiwan 
Work Committee deputy secretary generals. For a detailed summary of CCP underground operations on Taiwan, see 
Tseng Chien-yuan, “Communist Underground on Taiwan” (中共地下党在台湾), Beijing Spring, November 1, 2009, at 
http://www.chinainperspective.com/ArtShow.aspx?AID=3458. 
 
26 Cai Xiao was born in Tainan, and became involved in Chinese underground work during the civil war.  In 
November 1949, Cai Xiao was given the responsibility for forming the PLA Third Field Army Ninth Corps Taiwan 
Cadre Training Regiment (台湾干部训练团). The training unit formally began instruction on April 8, 1950. After 
serving in the PLA Air Force education and training system, he was jailed for nine years during the Cultural 
Revolution. Afterwards, he was assigned to the GPD Mass Works Department and then GPD/LD deputy director in 
1975. He retired from active duty, and then became chairman of the Taiwanese Alliance (台湾民主自治同盟) in 1978. 
Among various sources, see 蔡啸, 1919-1990, CCP News, at http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/7302326.html. Other key 
players included Zhang Bingyu (张秉玉; 1919-1989); Wang Xiulan (王秀兰), who conducted in operations on Taiwan 
between 1946 and 1949; and Wang Guanmin (王冠民; b. 1915), who had been sent to Taiwan in early 1947.  
 
27 In addition to Deputy Minister of Defense Wu Shi (吴石; 1894-1950), other senior operatives who were arrested 
included Nie Xi (聂曦; 1917-1950), Chen Baocang (陈宝仓; 1900-1950) of the KMT Revolutionary Committee, and Zhu 
Feng (朱谌; also known as Zhu Chengzhi). In the aftermath, the CMC established the General Intelligence 
Department on December 10, 1950 and consisted of three second level departments: the Intelligence Department (情
报部), Technical Department (技术部), and Liaison Department. In February 1953, the General Intelligence 
Department staff was disbanded.  
 
28 After serving under Zhang Zizhen as GPD/LD deputy director and promotion to major general in 1955, Wang 
Xinggang eventually became deputy director of the CMC General Office under Xiao Xiangrong (萧向荣; 1910～1976) 
until 1965. He was replaced by Pan Zhenwu, a former enemy work specialist and defense attaché in Moscow. Pan also 
was MND Foreign Affairs Bureau director. Among various sources, see (周恩来秘书领导段伯宇周旋于国民党上层人物
之间), CCP News Network, January 21, 2010, at http://dangshi.people.com.cn/GB/146570/180163/10814313.html. 

 
50 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
Another prominent enemy work officer was Huang Yuan (黄远; 1911-1992), served simultaneously as deputy director 
of the Third Field Army Liaison Department and Propaganda Department.  
 
29 The General Intelligence Department was established in December 1950. It oversaw three second level departments: 
the Intelligence Department, the Technical Department, and the Liaison Department. At least one account asserts 
that the GSD Intelligence Department and GSD Liaison Department were used to refer to the same organization. Li 
Kenong was dual-hatted as director of the General Intelligence Department and Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
Liu Shaowen (刘少文; 1905-1987; also known as 刘国章), who had previously been assigned to the Eighth Route 
Army’s Shanghai Liaison Office, directed the GSD Intelligence Department from 1954 to 1967. 
 
30 Wang Jiaxiang was dual-hatted as director of GPD and director of the Eighth Route Army Political Department. He 
was appointed as ambassador to the USSR in 1949. He returned to form the CCP International Liaison Department 
(ILD) in 1951. Former director of the 129th Division Enemy Work Department,  Zhang Xiangshan, served as Wang 
Jiaxiang’s mishu and eventually ILD deputy director. Feng Xuan (冯铉; 1915-1986), who emerged from the Social 
Work Department, was another ILD deputy director. GPD Enemy Work Department deputy director Li Chuli (李初黎; 
李楚离 1900-1995; also known as 李祚利) also played a critical role in CCP/ILD’s establishment. The core of the newly 
established ILD was the UFWD’s Second Office (中央统战部二处). See (中联部前部长朱良：试析指导党的对外工作战
略思想的变化), CCP/ID website, October 17, 2010, at http://www.idcpc.org.cn/ziliao/tbtj/100917.htm. 
 
31 Working closely with CCP General Office director Yang Shangkun, Li Kenong was assigned as the first CID director. 
Former Eighth Route Army Liaison Department officer Zou Dapeng (邹大鹏; 1907-1967) served as CID deputy 
director. 
 
32 See Peking- Taipei Contacts: The Question of a Possible “Chinese Solutions” (Wash DC: CIA Directorate of 
Intelligence, December 1971), POLO 34, declassified in 2007, at 
http://www.foia.cia.gov/sites/default/files/document_conversions/14/polo-34.pdf; and Foreign Relations Of The 
United States, 1958–1960, Volume Xix, China, Document 157, Telegram From the Embassy in the Republic of China 
to the Department of State, October 6, 1958, at http://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1958-
60v19/d157#fnref2. Also see Valentin Chu, Ta Ta Tan Tan: The Inside Story of Communist China (NY: Norton 
Publishers, 1963), pp. 244-245. 
 
33 At roughly the same time, CID was resubordinated under the GSD Second Department. See Dr. David Ian 
Chambers, “The Past and Present State of Chinese Intelligence Historiography,” Studies in Intelligence Vol. 56, No. 3 
(September 2012), pp. 31-46; and Xuezhi Guo, China's Security State: Philosophy, Evolution, and Politics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), p. 16.  
 
34 After joining the CCP in 1936, Yang Side directed enemy work operations in his native Shandong Province with the 
Eighth Route Army’s 115th Division, and became political commissar of the 34th Army’s 100th Division, which 
consisted of a combined force of KMT defectors and communists. His pseudonym was Li Yiming (李一明). Yang was 
promoted to major general and assigned as GPD/LD Deputy Director in 1964. He concurrently managed Taiwan, 
Hong Kong, and Macao operations as GPD/LD Guangzhou Liaison Bureau.  MG Yang Side was appointed as GPD/LD 
Director in July 1975. Other prominent figures during this period included Shen Chen (沈辰; b. 1922), also known as 
Li Jiatian (李家田) who directed operations from Guangzhou from 1972 onward (he was Mass Works Department 
deputy director). He retired as a consultant in 1987. For other background on Yang Side, see “’Subversion’ General 
Yang Side” ("策反"将军杨斯德), Shandong Archival Information Network, March 30, 2012, at 
http://www.sdab.gov.cn/daj/daby/daldgs/webinfo/2012/03/1332915270407714.htm. 
 
35 Ye Jianying (叶剑英; 1897-1986) was born in Guangdong’s Meixian Hakka community, and was a critical player in 
the transfer of power to Hua Guofeng in the wake of Mao’s death in 1976. He succeeded Lin Biao as Minister of 
Defense in 1976. Yang Shangkun was a CMC member after the Cultural Revolution, and appointed to the Politburo in 
1982. He served in Guangdong, along with Xi Jinping’s father, Xi Zhongxun. 
 
36 See You Ji and Daniel Alderman, “Changing Civil-Military Relations in China,” in Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, and 
Andrew Scobell (eds), The PLA at Home And Abroad: Assessing The Operational Capabilities Of China’s Military, 
pp. 166-167. 
 
37 See Chunjuan Nancy Wei, “China’s Anti-Secession Law and Hu Jintao’s Taiwan Policy,” Yale Journal, September 
2010, at http://yalejournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/105112wei.pdf. Also see Richard Bush, 
http://www.carnegieendowment.org/files/Bush_Revised.pdf. 
 

 
51 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
38 For a discussion of the China model (中国模式) and the international communist movement, see “Exploratory Road 
of the CCP and the International Communist Movement” (中共与国际共运的探索之路), Xinhua, June 21, 2011, 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/herald/2011-06/21/c_13933387.htm.  
 
39 For an excellent account, see Edward C. O’Dowd, Chinese Military Strategy in the Third Indochina War: The Last 
Maoist War (New York: Routledge Press, 2007). 
 
40 Huang Hua (黄华); also known as Wang Rumei was Ye Jianying’s mishu, and adopted a clear foreign affairs 
portfolio. 
 
41 For an excellent summary, see Christine Loh, Underground Front: The Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong 
(Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2010), p. 94-144. 
 
42 Xi Zhongxun is the father of CCP General Secretary and CMC Chairman Xi Jinping. Ji Pengfei is father of then-GSD 
Second Department Director, MG Ji Shengde.  A PLA veteran and oil industry authority, Yu Qiuli  replaced General 
Wei Guoxing as GPD Director in September 1982. Wei Guoxing was allegedly dismissed in the lead up to the 12th 
Party Congress for permitting the PLA Daily to publish an editorial that was critical of Deng Xiaoping’s reformist 
agenda, referring to his ''bourgeois liberalism'' and ideological laxness. The paper was forced to issue a retraction. See 
Mary-Louise O'Callaghan, “China's People's Liberation Army,” Christian Science Monitor, July 25, 1983. See “CAIFC 
Established in Beijing” (中国国际友好联络会在京成立), Renmin Ribao, December 22, 1984. CAIFC’s first honorary 
chairman was hardline Politburo member, Wang Zhen. 
 
43 After graduating from Beijing Polytechnical University in 1965, Ye Xuanning was jailed during the Cultural 
Revolution. After two years, he was released and sent to work in a factory, where he suffered a major injury to his 
right arm.  He was then assigned for a brief stint to the China Academy of Sciences, then to the State Council Overseas 
Chinese Office (国务院侨办二组). He was then promoted to serve as mishu to Kang Shi’en (康世恩; 1915-1995), who 
was dual hatted as Vice Premier and Director, State Economic Commission. Kang Shi’en was a pioneer in developing 
China’s energy policy, and is viewed as an initial member of China’s “oil faction,” along with Yu Qiuli, who became 
GPD Director in 1982. Ye Xuanning likely would have supported Kan Shi’en in initial energy security discussions 
between the U.S. and China in the 1977-1978 timeframe. Between 1980 and 1984, Ye was CEO of the Canglang 
Consulting Company (沧浪咨询公司). Ye Xuanning is alleged to be a distant cousin of Yu Shengzheng (from his 
mother’s side).  Ye used an alternate name of Yue Feng (岳枫) for CAIFC and other associations. For background, see 
“Ye Xuanning,” Guangdong Hakka Chamber of Commerce website, undated, at 
http://www.zhks.org/article.aspx?aid=269. For background on Kang Shi’en and the “oil faction,” see Kenneth 
Lieberthal and Michael Oksenberg, Policy Making in China: Leaders, Structures, and Processes (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1988), pp. 44-51. As an aside, Yu Qiuli’s son-in-law is alleged to be Mei Shan (梅山; Shan 
Mei), who has facilitated China-related business for retired senior U.S. policy makers, major US corporations, and 
consulting firms over two decades. Mei Shan’s father is Mei Yi (梅益; 1913-2003), a prominent broadcasting authority 
and translator. See “Children Of Senior Officials Attending Foreign Colleges,” Ming Pao Monthly, July 1986, in 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service (JPRS-CPS-87-020), April 8, 1987, p. 62. Originally from Guangdong, he also 
is supposedly familiar with former GPD/LD Director Ye Xuanning. Yu Qiuli’s son, Yu Fangfang, is allegedly married 
to Ye Xuanning’s sister (叶文珊). 
 
44 Ye Xuanning reportedly reached out to former senior U.S. officials for assistance in sending his daughter, Ye Jingze, 
to school in the U.S. See Jamil Anderlini, “The Courting of China’s Powerful Princelings,” Financial Times, November 
15, 2010, at http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8ed4b3d2-f102-11df-bb17-00144feab49a.html#axzz2VisvnZFd. For an 
excellent summary of Princeling politics, see John Garnaut, “China's Princelings Break Their Silence,” Sydney 
Morning Herald, October 17, 2011, at http://www.smh.com.au/world/chinas-princelings-break-their-silence-
20111016-1lrkh.html. Also see Cheng Li, China's Leaders: The New Generation (Wash DC: Rowman & Littlefield, 
2001), pp. 127-170. 
 
45 Marshal Ye Jianying was alleged to have advocated the assignment of Xi Zhongxun as Guangdong Province Party 
Committee Secretary, and possibly the assignment of his son, Xi Jinping, to serve as mishu to Minister of Defense 
Geng Biao. 
 
46 Zhao Ziyang had been the prospective successor to reformist Hu Yaobang as CCP General Secretary. See Zhao 
Ziyang, Prisoner of the State: The Secret Journal of Premier Zhao Ziyang (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2009), p. 
201. 
 
47 From 1982 to 1987, Wang Zhen (王震; b. 1908) directed the Central Party School, and became Vice-President in 

 
52 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
1988. Rong Yiren (荣毅仁; b. 1916), who represented one of the few wealthy families to remain in China after the CCP 
took power in 1949, was chairman of the China Unification Promotion Council and CPPCC Vice Chairman. Working 
closely with Deng Xiaoping’s inner circle, Rong Yiren established a flagship enterprise in January 1979 – the China 
International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC). The Hong Kong agreement was followed in 1987 with the 
Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau signed by PRC and Portuguese representatives. Wang Zhen’s son, Wang 
Jun (王军), served as the initial CEO of Poly Technologies of behalf of GSD. Another PLA company was Xinshidai 
(New Era). 
 
48 Among various sources discussing Carrie Enterprises Group (中国凯利实业有限公司), see Tai Ming Cheung, 
China's Entrepreneurial Army (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 140-145; and James C. 
Mulvenon, Soldiers of Fortune: The Rise and Fall of the Chinese Military-Business Complex, 1978-1998 (London: 
M.E. Sharpe, 2001), pp. 121-123.The Hong Kong listed company was Hong Kong Macau International Holdings, 
which changed its name to Po Wing Kwan in late1997. Other Carrie-affiliated enterprises included Tiancheng (中国天
诚集团), HMH Gold Mining in Australia, and Hong Kong Macau Holdings, which invested in luxury real estate 
development in Guangdong Province. One other subsidiary is said to include the China Jinqiao Travel Company (中国
金桥旅游总公司), which was established in 1986. Another is the Beijing Fishing Supplies Company (北京碧海钓具有限
公司), which was established by Jin Li in 1988. See its website at 
http://www.bjbhdj.com/webcontent/default.asp?pageID=4.  
 
49 Since 1955, the TALSG Office had been staffed largely by officers from the Central Investigation Department (CID), 
the precursor of today’s Ministry of State Security (MSS). Luo Qingchang (罗青长; b. 1918), father of outspoken AMS 
authority, MG (ret) Luo Yuan, had been a central figure in the TAO until the Central Investigation Department’s 
reorganization and establishment of the MSS in 1983. Huangpu graduate Yang Yindong (杨荫东; b. 1922) retired in 
1985, and served as deputy director and secretary general of the Huangpu Alumni Association. His son is said to be 
Yang Yuanyuan (杨元元; b. 1951), an PLAAF-trained pilot and prominent figure within the Civil Aviation 
Administration of China (CAAC). At least one report asserts that Yang Side was dual hatted as TALSG Office director 
and UFWD deputy director. 
 
50 Zhou Enlai’s wife, Deng Yingchao (邓颖超; 1904-1992), directed the TALSG from 1978 to 1985, when she was 
replaced by Yang Shangkun. New members included Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Zheng 
Tuopin, Deputy Foreign Minister Zhu Qizhen, Minister of State Security (MSS) Jia Chunwang, and Vice President of 
the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), and Zhao Fusan. 
 
51 Among various sources, see David M. Lampton, The Making of Chinese Foreign and Security Policy in the Era of 
Reform (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001), pp. 299-300. Assisting Yang Side was UFWD Deputy 
Director Liao Chengzhi (廖承志; 1908-1983), a former head of the Xinhua News Agency who had risen through the 
ranks of the united front system. Born in Japan and with Hakka roots in Guangdong, Liao was a Taiwan expert who 
served as chief negotiator in talks with the UK on the future of Hong Kong. Liao Chengzhi’s son, Liao Hui (廖晖; b. 
1942), is said to have begun his party career as a GPD/LD cadre, and subsequently assigned as deputy director of the 
Hong Kong Macau Affairs office in 1983. He was appointed director in 1984. 
 
52 Deng Xiaoping initiated the “One Country, Two Systems” solution in 1979. Under the proposal, governing 
authorities on Taiwan would retain an autonomous political, economic, military, and legal system as a special 
administrative region under the PRC central government. In March 1981, ROC President Chiang Ching-kuo outlined 
pre-conditions for unification based upon Sun Yat-sen’s Three Principles of the People: democracy, freedom, and 
prosperity. 
 
53 Jin Li was an ethnic Korean who directed GPD/LD from March 1985 to his passing in June 1990.  He was a Japan 
specialist, and a member of the Chinese Red Cross (中国红十字会), Jin Li also was a member of the Foreign Affairs 
Association (外交学会), China-Japan Association for Friendly Contact (中日友协副秘书长), CAIFC executive deputy 
director, and China Diaoyu Association (中国钓鱼协会).  For reference to his tenure as Executive Deputy Director of 
CAIFC, see http://www.caifc.org.cn/content.aspx?id=397.  At least two GPD/LD deputy directors supported Jin Li 
during his tenure. One was MG Su Zhenxiang (苏祯祥; b. 1930), who headed the GPD/LD Liaison Bureau, and 
subsequently served as GPD/LD Deputy Director. He retired in 1988. 
 
54 In the lead up to the 70th anniversary of the ROC founding, the CCP’s Ye Jianying issued an invitation to KMT 
leaders in 1981. In August 1981, CCK’s former mishu, Shen Cheng, accepted.  Shen had moved to Hong Kong in 1980. 
See “Yang Side To Be Named Chief of Taiwan Affairs Office,” Hong Kong Standard, February 25, 1988, p. 6. Directing 
the TALSG from 1987 to 1992, Yang Shangkun became PRC president in 1988 and expanded the group’s membership. 

 
53 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
His half-brother, Yang Baibing (杨白冰; 1920-2013), was appointed Director, General Political Department in 1987. 
 
55 For background on Nan Huaijin (南怀谨; b. 1918), Jia Yibin, and the special channel, see Su Chi, Taiwan's 
Relations with Mainland China: A Tail Wagging Two Dogs (London: Routledge, 2009), p. 10; Jing Huang and 
Xiaoting Li, Inseparable Separation: The Making of China's Taiwan Policy (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing 
Company, 2010), pp. 131-146; John Tkacik, “Premier Wen and Vice President Zeng: The ‘Two Centers’ of China’s 
‘Fourth Generation’,” in Andrew Scobell and Larry Wortzel (eds), Civil-Military Change In China: Elites, Institutes, 
and Ideas After The 16th Party Congress (Wash DC: 2004), pp. 95-178; Sheng Lijun, China and Taiwan: Cross-
Strait Relations Under Chen Shui-bian (Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Relations, 2002), pp. 95; Chu Yun-
han, “Evolution of Beijing’s Policy Toward Taiwan During the Reform Period,” in Yong Deng and Fei-Ling Wang 
(eds.), China’s Rising: Power and Motivation in Chinese Foreign Policy (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield 
Publishing, 2005), pp. 245-278; and Wang Baida, “Lee Teng-hui’s Secret Operation” (李登辉的密使操作), Asia 
Weekly (亞洲周刊), May 4, 2008. Asserting itself to be the legitimate political heirs of Sun Yat-sen, the Revolutionary 
Committee (中国国民党革命委员会) had been a left wing faction of the KMT until its spin-off in 1948. Among key 
players on the Taiwan side included Chang Jung-feng and Tseng Yung-yin (曾永贤), a close confidante of Lee Teng-
hui.   
 
56 Among various sources, see Jing Huang and Xiaoting Li, p. 146. Meetings in Beijing involved CMC Vice Chairman 
Yang Shangkun, GPD/LD Director Ye Xuanning, another senior GPD/LD officer, MG Chang Yansheng (常燕生), as 
well as Taiwan-focused GPD specialists such as Shen Weiping and Xin Qi. Chang Yansheng had been labeled as 
GPD/LD “Taiwan Bureau” director (总政联络部对台局局长). See “Singing to Leap Across the Taiwan Strait” (长歌越
海峡), Zhongguang Network, November 2, 2006, at 
http://www.cnr.cn/zhuanti1/2005tq/zqzy/200512/t20051227_504147176.html.The Taiwan Bureau most likely is an 
alternative reference to the GPD/LD Liaison Bureau. A Hong Kong-based report of unknown reliability asserts that 
Taiwan and an unidentified Nanjing MR office established a defense telephone link, or “hotline,” in the mid-1990s.  
 
57 With roots in Hebei’s Fengrun County, Wang Zhaoguo was an engineer who graduated from the Harbin Institute of 
Technology. He worked in the automotive industry until 1982, when he caught the attention of Deng Xiaoping. He 
was assigned as China Communist Youth League (CCYL) First Secretary, served as assistant to Hu Jintao, and elected 
as a Central Committee member (the youngest on the committee). In 1985 and 1986, he served as mishu to CCP 
Secretary General Hu Yaobang, a revolutionary hero and leading proponent of economic reforms, and Director, CCP 
Central Committee General Office. A decade after Hu stepped down as CCP Secretary General in January 1987, Wang 
Zhaoguo lost his Central Committee seat and was assigned as Fujian Provincial Party Committee Deputy Secretary 
and Governor. During this period, Xi Jinping was serving as Ningde County Party Committee Secretary and Jia 
Qinglin served as a second Party Committee Secretary, directing the Party Committee Organization Department. 
Wang Zhaoguo was also served as UFWD Director from 1992-2002.  
 
58 Lena Sun, “Deng Completes Major Army Purge,” New York Times, February 12, 1993. Former Nanjing MR Political 
Department Director, Yu Yongbo (于永波; b. 1939), was assigned as GPD Director in 1992. In January 1994, Jiang 
Zemin and his formal cross-Strait negotiator, Wang Daohan, opened a new back channel for communication.  Central 
Committee General Office Director Zeng Qinghong, a protégé of former GPD Director Yu Qiuli and close associate of 
Jiang Zemin and Wang Daohan, reportedly led the efforts.  On April 4, 1994, Lee Teng-hui’s office director first met 
with Zeng Qinghong. During the meeting in Zhuhai, Taiwan interlocutors had been authorized to raise a notional 
peace accord, which Zeng rebuffed as tantamount to a state-to-state agreement. In March 1995, he was said to have 
been pre-briefed on the proposed travel of Lee to the Middle East and the United States. As an aside, Zeng Qinghong 
was mishu to Yu Qiuli when he directed the State Planning Commission in the late 1970s/early 1980s. This was the 
same period as Xi Jinping was supporting Geng Biao. 
 
59 Xiong Guangkai became GSD Intelligence Department director in 1988, then promoted to assistant to the Chief of 
the General Staff in 1992. After promotion to LTG and election as an alternate Central Committee member in 1994, 
Xiong became DCGOS in January 1996. Despite Jiang’s support for Xiong, Xu Yongyue was appointed as director of 
MSS in March 1998. Xu served as mishu, or more specifically as office director, to Chen Yun between 1983 and 1993. 
Chen Yun was Central Discipline Inspection Commission secretary between 1978 and 1987. Xu Yongyue also had 
served as deputy secretary general of the Central Advisory Commission. Among various sources, see Peter Mattis, 
“China’s Intelligence Reforms? The Diplomat, January 23, 2013, at http://thediplomat.com/china-power/chinas-
intelligence-reforms/. 
 
60 (张万年出任对台工作领导是中共准备动武的信号), Renminbao, October 20, 2000, at 
http://renminbao.com/rmb/articles/2000/10/20/4714.html. 
 

 
54 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
61 Wang Chuo-chen, “Communist Chinese Military Influence on Taiwan Policy Grows” (对台决策 共军影响力增强), 
China Times, July 29, 2000, at 
http://gb.chinatimes.com/gate/gb/forums.chinatimes.com.tw/report/bargain/htm/89072910.asp. Xiong Guangkai 
was a career GSD Second Department officer who had served at the PRC Embassy in East Berlin. 
 
62 Operating out of Xiamen, founder and chairman of Yuanhua Group (远华集团) Lai Changxing, imported foreign 
products such as cars, cigarettes, and petroleum products. An initial victim in the scandal was GSD Second 
Department Director, MG Ji Shengde (姬胜德). He was called to an enlarged CMC meeting at Beijing’s Yuquan 
Mountain in March 1999, and subsequently arrested.  The following month, the Central Discipline Inspection 
Commission (中纪委) established a task force, known as the 420 Program Office (四二 O 专案组), to investigate the 
Yuanhua case in further detail. Ji Shengde’s father, Ji Pengfei, was an esteemed foreign affairs figure. Ji Shengde was 
sentenced to death in August 1999. His sentence was commuted to life imprisonment in 2002. Fleeing to Hong Kong 
in August 1999, and subsequently to Canada, Lai Changxing was extradited in July 2011.At the height of Lai's 
corruption in the 1990s, the Fujian party chief was Jia Qinglin and Xi Jinping was the Fujian governor. In an 
interview, Lai Changxing (赖昌星) highlighted the role of a GPD case officer, Wu Dahu (吴大潮). Also see James 
Mulvenon, “To Get Rich Is Unprofessional: Chinese Military Corruption in the Jiang Era,” China Leadership Monitor 
6 (2003): 21–35. 
 
63 Among various sources, see “Why Can’t the Wu Yonghong Case Be Solved?” (吴永红案为什么办不了?), Viewing 
China, May 30, 2005, at http://m.kanzhongguo.com/node/115739. Also see “Minfa Securities to Propose Debt Swap,” 
Caijing, August 20, 2004, at http://english.caijing.com.cn/2004-08-20/100013892.html.“What Does a RMB 9 
Billion Shortfall Mean?: The Mystery of Minfa Securities ‘Black Hole’” (90 亿的亏空意味着什么？: 闽发证券“黑洞”探
秘), Xinhua, May 16, 2005, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/fortune/2005-05/16/content_2962411.htm. and 
http://www.scmp.com/article/499590/migrant-hits-back-after-media-crime-accusations. Also see (闽发证券破产八
年终结案 清偿 73 亿元), Xinhua, December 28, 2012, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/finance/2012-
12/28/c_124159753.htm; and(賈慶林情婦及私生子均來港定居), Boxun, October 5, 2007, at 
http://boxun.com/news/gb/china/2007/10/200710051810.shtml. 
 
64 See Eva Cheng, “Jiang's Salvo against Chinese Military Businesses,” Green Left Weekly (Australia), August 19, 1998, 
at http://www.greenleft.org.au/node/17013; John Garnaut, “Show Them the Money, Old China,” Sydney Morning 
Herald, March 26, 2011, at http://www.smh.com.au/business/show-them-the-money-old-china-20110325-
1ca3f.html; and Dan Levin and Michael Wines, “Cast of Characters Grows, as Does the Intrigue, in a Chinese Political 
Scandal,” New York Times, March 8, 2012, at http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/09/world/asia/in-china-bo-xilais-
political-scandal-deepens.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.  One possible connected company is (北京汇泉国际投资有限
公司). However, corporatist affiliations may still exist through former GPD/LD officers. Former Carrie chief financial 
officer Weng Zhenjie (翁振杰; b. 1962) allegedly became CEO of Chongqing Trust Investment Corporation (重庆国际
信托投资公司). The company was established in October 1984. Weng is a member of the Democratic Construction 
Party (民建会).  
 
65 For reference to Carrie’s southern China operations merger with Huaneng, see Tai Ming Cheung, China's 
Entrepreneurial Army (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 238-239. Po Wing Kwan 
International (Holdings) Ltd (宝荣坤国际控股有限公司) changed its name to China Land Group Ltd on May 23, 2000. 
Oei Hong Leong (黄鸿年) served as CEO. The transaction was facilitated by the China Strategic Holdings’ subsidiary, 
China WTO.com. China Strategic Holdings (CSH; 中策集团有限公司) was formerly known as China Internet Global 
Alliance Limited. For other background, see (资不抵债 中国凯利实业１元转让), China Securities News, March 15, 
2010, at http://finance.ce.cn/rolling/201003/15/t20100315_15606065.shtml. Carrie subsidiaries include Kaicheng 
International Engineering, Co (凯城国际工程公司). See http://company.stcn.com/content/2012-
05/04/content_5538451_4.htm. Carrie Group today is managed by Ye Xuanning’s son, Ye Hong (叶弘).See 
http://www.carriefund.com/channel-10.html. After SASAC-owned companies were directed out of the real estate 
business in 2010, the Carrie Group and 13 subsidiaries began operating at a loss. 
 
66 During Liang Hongchang’s tenure, at least three deputy directors of GPD/LD included MG Zeng Xiaodong (曾小东; 
b. 1948); MG Shen Yunliang (沈云良; b. 1951); and possibly Shi Chenglin (石成林; b. 1950). Zeng Xiaodong’s father is 
allegedly Zeng Xisheng (曾希圣; 1904-1968), one of the leading figures in establishment of the PLA’s intelligence 
community. Zeng Xiaodong was promoted to major general in 2002. With mandatory retirement age for a deputy 
corps leader being 55, and assuming a five year time in service requirement after promotion, Zeng likely retired in 
2007. Born in Beijing and promoted to MG in July 2001, Shen Yunliang (also known as Luo Sunshan; 落孙山) was in 
the position in the 2000 timeframe, promoted to MG in 2001, and most likely retired in 2007. MG (ret) Du Rubo (杜

 
55 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
汝波; b. 1952) most likely replaced Zeng or Shen after retirement from active duty. See 
http://www.js.xinhuanet.com/2012-08/27/c_112862101.htm. Li Ning (李宁) also served as GPD/LD deputy director. 
Although it cannot be confirmed with confidence, Li Ning may have been subsequently assigned as deputy director of 
the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT) Political Department (科大政治部副主任). A Li Ning currently 
serves as an NDU deputy political commissar and secretary of the NDU Discipline Inspection Commission. See 
http://club.xilu.com/xinguancha/msgview-950389-133115.html. For reference to Liang Shi and Chen Zuming 
traveling to Palau for Taiwan-related discussions, see (帕劳近来与台关系已降温扁欲二度访斐济), China Review News, 
August 16, 2006, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1001/9/0/7/100190709.html?coluid=0&kindid=0&docid=100190709. 
 
67 For one account of a 2002 dialogue between the China Association for Promotion of Chinese Culture (CAPCC; 中华
文化发展促进会), Peace and Development Research Center, and counterparts from Taiwan’s World League for 
Freedom and Democracy, see http://www.wlfdroc.org.tw/news/C_showdetail.asp?id=%7B95734CF2-F703-4C99-
A794-25302EBC59CB%7D.http://www.taiwan.cn/tp/bwtp/201111/t20111110_2147484.htm; Also see 
http://www.taiwan.cn/xwzx/bwkx/201111/t20111109_2147001.htm; and 
http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/2010/09/07/271661/Culture-next.htm.   
 
68 For a general overview of Chinese political warfare, see Guo Dafang and Zhang Jichun, (战斗力的永恒要素:军队政
治工作作战功能研究) (Beijing: PLA Press, 2005), at http://www.1921.org.cn/book.php?ac=blist&bid=466. Among 
various published works in English that address GPD/LD, see David M. Lampton, The Making of Chinese Foreign 
and Security Policy in the Era of Reform (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001), pp. 81-82; Xuezhi Guo, 
China's Security State: Philosophy, Evolution, and Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), p. 372. 
 
69 J. Michael Waller, “Chinese Political Warfare Strategy Against the US,” Institute of World Politics Insight, April 23, 
2001, at http://www.iwp.edu/news_publications/detail/chinese-political-warfare-strategy-against-the-us. 
 
70“New Revised ‘PLA Political Work Guidelines’,” September 13, 2010.  
 
71 Ibid. 
 
72 Yue Zhongqiang (ed), Basic Military Political Work Theory (军队政治工作基础理论) (Beijing: National Defense 
University Press, 2003), p. 137. 
 
73 Yue Zhongqiang, pp. 139-140. 
 
74 For an example of Congressional interaction, see “Senior Vice-Chairman Xing Yunming Meets with A Delegation of 
Former American Senators,” CAIFC Press Release, February 26, 2013, at 
http://www.caifc.org.cn/en/content.aspx?id=3033. 
 
75 Yue Zhongqiang, pp. 137-139. 
 
76 Ibid.  
 
77 See Anna-Marie Brady, Making the Foreigner Serve China: Managing Foreigners in the People’s Republic 
(Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2009), p. 192. Also see Zhou Guobao and Zhang Shengxia (eds), Practice of 
Foreign Affairs Management (外事管理实务) (Guangzhou: Huanan Polytechnical University, 2005), p. 138. 
 
78 Yue Zhongqiang, pp. 140-141. For one outlet carrying commentary of officers who most likely are supporting 
ideological defense, see the “Strong Country Blog,” at http://qgblog.people.com.cn/military/. 
 
79 See 国家广播电影电视总局、公安部、国家安全部关于坚决查处擅自接收、转播境外卫星电视的通知, SARFT 
release, April 1, 1999, at http://www.chinaacc.com/new/63/73/143/2006/2/xu46082834412822600215504-0.htm. 
80 See 星期日泰晤士报》称布莱尔陷“中国间谍圈套,” Xinhua, June 4, 2013, at 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/overseas/2013-06/04/c_124807706.htm. 
 
81 For background on small leading groups (领导小组), see Alice Miller, “The CCP Central Committee’s Leading Small 
Groups,” China Leadership Monitor, No. 26, at 
http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/CLM26AM.pdf. 
 

 
56 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
82 Born in Henan’s Ye County, General Jia Ting’an began his professional career as a civilian in the electronics 
industry, and served as mishu to Jiang Zemin while Minister of Electronics. Jia accompanied Jiang to Shanghai in 
1985, and served as his mishu between 1985 and 1989. Jia accompanied Jiang back to Beijing, and served as his 
mishu after the latter’s election as Secretary General. In 1994, Jia was assigned as deputy director of the CMC General 
Office. He was appointed as a member of the 420 Investigation Group, charged with investigating the Yuanhua case 
in the 1999-2000 timeframe. He was an alternate member of the 17th Central Committee and elected as a full member 
of the 18th Central Committee. He was promoted to LTG in July 2005, and to full general in July 2011.  
 
83 Dual hatted as secretary of the CMC Discipline Inspection Committee (央军委纪律检查委员会书记), Du Jincai 
previously served as deputy director, Xinjiang MD Political Department; Political Commissar, 21st Group Army 
(2005), then Chengdu MR Political Department Director (2006), and Assistant to the Director, GPD (2007). Du 
Jincai replaced ADM Dong Shiping (童世平; b. 1947).  
 
84 Born in November 1952, GEN Wu Changde is from Dayu, Jiangxi Province. He rose through the propaganda work 
system. In the 1990s, he was deputy director of the 31st Group Army, then Nanjing Military Region Political 
Department deputy director. From 2003 to 2007, Wu Changde directed the GPD Propaganda Department. In 2007, 
he was assigned as director of the Chengdu MR Political Department. He subsequently rotated to the GPD deputy 
director position in 2011. He was promoted to full general in August 2013. 
 
85 LTG Yin Fanglong was assigned as GPD deputy director in October 2012. He had headed the Second Artillery 
Political Department since 2009.  Before his Second Artillery assignment, he worked in GAD and within the 1st Group 
Army 3rd Tank Division. During his Second Artillery assignment, Yin accompanied GEN Xu Caihou on his 2009 U.S. 
visit, including to U.S. Strategic Command. Yin was promoted to LTG in July 2010. 
 
86 LTG Cui Changjun has spent most of his career in the Chengdu Military Region. His most recent assignments 
include political commissar of the 13th Group Army and director of the Beijing Military Region Political Department. 
He replaced Wei Liang (魏亮), who was appointed as political commissar of the Guangzhou Military Region. 
 
87 VADM Cen Xu, who spent part of his career in the Navy Equipment Department and East Sea Fleet, replaced LTG 
Nian Fucun (年福纯; b. 1949), who retired.  He is a member of the CCP Discipline Inspection Commission. 
 
88 Units spend between 20 and 30 percent of their total training time on political and ideological instruction. See Also 
see Dennis J. Blasko, The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century (New York: 
Routledge, 2012), p. 201. 
 
89 For background on the GPD, see Larry Wortzel, “The General Political Department and the Evolution of the 
Political Commissar System,” in James C. Mulvenon and Andrew N.D. Yang (eds), The People’s Liberation Army as 
Organization (Santa Monica, CA:RAND, 2002), pp. 225-245. Also see Dennis J. Blasko, The Chinese Army Today: 
Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century, p. 34. For an excellent overview of the CCP’s organizational 
structure, see Susan V. Lawrence and Michael F. Martin, “Understanding China’s Political System,” Congressional 
Research Service, March 20, 2013, at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R41007.pdf. 
 
90 Born in Wuchang County (Hebei Province), GEN Zhang Yang (张阳; b. 1951) was a political officer within the 
Guangzhou MR artillery community and served as political commissar of the 55th Group Army’s 163rd Division from 
1996 t0 2000. He then served as 42nd Group Army Political Department director and PC. From December 2004 to 
September 2007, he directed the Guangzhou MR Political Department, and subsequently served as political 
commissar of the Guangzhou MR. The previous GPD director was General Li Jinai (李继耐; b. 1942), who was in the 
position in September 2004. Having served in senior billets within Guangzhou MR, Zhang Yang likely became 
familiar with Zhang Dejiang. Zhang was a Standing Committee member, son of a prominent PLA artillery officer, and 
secretary general of the Guangdong Provincial Party Committee between 2002 and 2007. 
 
91 Based on number of foreign meetings arranged through CAIFC, GPD Deputy Director LTG Wu Changde’s portfolio 
includes foreign affairs. He has a background in propaganda work. Former GPD deputy director, Tang Tianbiao, 
appears to have had a similar portfolio. Tang is now a member of the NPC’s Education, Science, Culture and Public 
Health Committee, and still active in CAIFC activities as a consultant to the Hainan AIFC. GPD Deputy Secretary 
General (总政副秘书长) Li Fengshan (李凤山) is the mishu most often associated with GPD/LD and MND/FAO. Li 
Fengshang previously directed the GPD General Office Secretariat Bureau (总政办公厅秘书局局长). Major General 
Zhang Gongxian (张贡献; b. 1960) formerly served as GPD General Office Director and mishu to former GPD Director, 
General Xu Caihou. He currently directs the Jinan Military Region Political Department. 
 

 
57 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
92 One example of an international law conference is an event in 2011 in Italy’s San Remo on armed conflict as sea. 
See “Handshakes, San Remo” (握手, 圣雷莫), S&T Daily, May 10, 2011, at 
http://www.stdaily.com/kjrb/content/2011-05/10/content_303463.htm; and Guo Jiangshan and Wang Yafu, “PLA 
Academy Team Attends 10th International Competition on LAC for Military Academies,” PLA Daily, May 25, 2011, at 
http://eng.mod.gov.cn/Database/Academies/2011-05/25/content_4243978.htm. The General Office also manages a 
Mass Work Office (群众工作办公室), which had previously been a separate second level department under GPD. 
 
93 Qin Shengxiang has been in the military organization/party affairs system for most of his career. 
 
94 The Propaganda Department consists of a Propaganda Bureau (宣传局); News Publication Bureau (新闻出版局); 
Theory and Education Bureau (理论教育局); Culture and Sports Bureau (文化体育); and External Propaganda Bureau 
(对外宣传局). It also manages the CCTV Military Propaganda Center (中央人民广播电台军事宣传中心), which 
appears to be a corps deputy leader-level organization. The Center is directed by Senior Colonel Li Zhen (李真). Li 
Zhen formerly served as GPD Propaganda Department Deputy Director and External Propaganda Department 
Deputy Director. 
 
95 MG Yu Shanjun (于善军; b. 1953) has directed the GPD Security Department since 2010.  The Security 
Department’s Security Bureau (保卫局) appears responsible for crime prevention, counter-subversion, protection of 
military secrets, and background investigations. The Reconnaissance Bureau (侦察局) appears responsible for 
counterintelligence. A separate bureau is responsible for criminal investigations (刑侦局). 
 
96 See Chen Donglong, “PLA GPD Liaison Department” (解放军总政治部), Dongsen News (Taiwan), December 2000, 
at http://www.nownews.com/2000/12/02/303-289746.htm. 
 
97 For reference to the GPD Military Court role in legal warfare, see Wang Yunlong, “Thoughts on Establishment of a 
Political Strike Command” (关于成立政治攻势部的想法), China Today Forum (今日中国论坛), 2013 (1), at 
http://www.cnki.com.cn/Article/CJFDTOTAL-JRZL201301118.htm. 
 
98 Sports and athletes are an important aspect of military political work. For example, speed skater Ye Qiaobao (叶乔
波; b. 1964) is a retired PLA officer now serving as a GPD/LD specialist.  
 
99 For example, Deputy Director, NDU Military Science Research Department, MG Wu Guifu (武桂馥) is a member of 
the GPD/LD advisory group (总政治部联络部咨询专家组). He was formerly Deputy Secretary General, China Military 
Science Association (中国军事科学学会). He also was a fellow at the Peterson Institute in Wash DC and Columbia 
University in the early 1990s. 
 
100 For one  reference to Xing Yunming as a lieutenant general (LTG), see “Opening Ceremony Held for Opening of 
Linyi Golf Academy” (临沂大学华仁高尔夫学院揭牌仪式隆重举行), Linyi University Golf Academy, May 7 2013, at 
http://www.daxuegolf.com/view.asp?id=16. For an early reference to Xing Yunming as GPD/LD director, see “CMC 
Investigation Group Investigates the Guangxi PAP Group” (中央军委调研组到武警广西总队调研), Guangxi Daily 
News, February 16, 2006, http://news.gxnews.com.cn/staticpages/20060216/newgx43f3cd43-553713.shtml; and Lin 
Tsung-sheng, “Hsieh’s Office Not Aware of Xin Qi’s Intelligence Warfare” (谢办不识辛旗 情报战落下风), China Times, 
October 9, 2012, at 
http://gb.chinatimes.com/gate/gb/news.chinatimes.com/mainland/17180504/112012100900580.html. An avid 
golfer, Xing replaced MG Liang Hongchang (梁宏昌; b. 1947), who appears to employ a the pseudonym of Liang Shi 
(梁湜).  
 
101 One speculative reference asserts Xing was mishu to GPD/LD Deputy Director Chen Hua. In 1994 and as late as 
1997, Chen Hua was a deputy director of CAIFC. A Chen Hua (陈华) is listed as a CAIFC member. MG Xing’s official 
biography indicates he also served as CEO of China Excel Finance (Holding) Company (中国华扬财务集团有限公司), 
which was registered in Hong Kong in 1996.  
 
102 A report of unknown reliability speculated that a senior Taiwan political figure met with representatives from the 
Central Committee General Office in the run-up to the March 2000 Presidential election. The report mentioned in 
passing the involvement of an individual named Xing Yunming, who reportedly was affiliated with the Central 
Committee General Office. In 2000, Xing appears to have directed the GPD/LD Liaison Bureau, which is probably 
responsible for Taiwan-focused political warfare operations. See “KMT Launches Libel Suit Against Author of New 
Book” (国民党以诽谤罪起诉新书作者), Voice of America, August 15, 2003, at http://www.voachinese.com/content/a-

 
58 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
21-a-2002-08-15-24-1-63355407/989391.html. 
 
103 For background on Huaxia Jingwei (华夏经纬信息科技有限公司), see http://www.huaxia.com/.  
 
104 As a side note, Xing Yunming has been openly critical of senior provincial and maniple-level cadre presenting a 
negative international image. See “Xing Yunming: Strengthen Leading Cadre Model Management When Traveling 
Abroad” (邢运明：加强领导干部出国规范管理), CPPCC website, March 26, 2013, at 
http://cppcc.people.com.cn/n/2013/0326/c34948-20918291.html. 
 
105 For references to Li Xiaohua (李晓华), see Lin Tsung-sheng, “Hsieh’s Office Not Aware of Xin Qi’s Intelligence 
Warfare” (谢办不识辛旗 情报战落下风), China Times, October 9, 2012, at 
http://gb.chinatimes.com/gate/gb/news.chinatimes.com/mainland/17180504/112012100900580.html. and see 
http://bkbbs.net/yizhouredian/lixiaohua/326111.html. Little is known about the White Jade Association (中国白玉研
究会). 
 
106 Other sources reflect Wei Liqun (魏礼群; b. 1944) as State Council Research Office director between 2001 and 
2008.  
 
107 For reference to Li Xiaohua as a GPD/LD bureau director, see “Forum for Food Security” (食品安全论坛现场直播), 
Consumer Advocacy Network, May 21, 2008, at 
http://tswq.caqp.org.cn/Article_Show.asp?ArticleID=301&ArticlePage=1. 
 
108 During a dialogue with retired US military officers in 2009, Li Xiaohua served as secretary general for the Chinese 
side, with Xiong Guangkai as delegation leader. 
 
109 For reference to Chen Zuming (陈祖明; b. 1956) serving as GPD/LD Liaison Bureau director, see (与总政联络局陈
祖明局长（中）中国金融书协主席张铜彦（左二） 、在中国金融出版社), Artists Daily (书画名家报) , May 25, 2010, at 
http://www.shmjb.com/detail.asp?ID=92. For a broad survey of CCP cross-Strait strategy, see 台灣大劫難. 
 
110 “Chen Zuming Elected as China Association of Southeast Asian Studies” (陈祖明秘书长当选中国东南亚研究会副会
长), CAIFC Press Release, January 6, 2011, at http://www.caifc.org.cn/content.aspx?id=363. One other possible 
GPD/LD deputy director may be Zhao Lubo (赵鲁渤), who ostensibly was promoted to major general in 2013. 
 
111 For reference to Xin Qi as GPD Liaison Department deputy director and CAPCC deputy director, see "Centennial 
Celebration of Zhang Zhiyi" (张执一同志百年诞辰纪念会), Yan'an Spirit Research Association Press Release, May 11, 
2011, at http://www.1921.org.cn/news.php?ac=view&id=3417. For other references, see “East Meets West at DSMC,” 
which also highlighted the GPD association in November 1996. Also see 
http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/print/2011/11/21/2003518836; and http://www.huaxia.com/zt/zhwh/11-
016/2387083.html.  
 
112 MG (ret) Shen Weiping formerly worked within the PLAAF Political Department Liaison Department before 
transferring to GPD/LD. In 2007, Shen Weiping worked closely with counterparts within the TAO on united front 
activities. In November 2007, then GPD Deputy Director MG Shen Weiping, Ye Kedong (叶克冬; b. 1953), and Zhou 
Wenzhong chaired the Global Summit for Promotion of Chinese Peaceful Unification (全球促进中国和平统一高峰论坛) 
in Washington DC. Among various sources, see Han Yuanxiu,“Speech for Global Summit for China Peaceful 
Unification” (在“全球促进中国和平统一高峰论坛”上的致词), at 
http://www.taiwan.cn/tsh/mtxy/tylt/200803/t20080328_615528.htm.  
 
113 (辛旗回忆当年汪辜会谈筹备细节 感佩汪道涵包容), China Review News, April 23, 2013, at 
http://www.chinanews.com/tw/2013/04-23/4757428.shtml. In the 2002 timeframe, he was a researcher within the 
Taiwan Strait Research Center (海峡两岸研究中心). 
 
114 Similar to Samuel Huntington’s “clash of civilizations,” MG Xin Qi’s concept is that civilizations and culture, rather 
than ideology, will be the source of future conflict. See “Xin Qi’s Most Recent Commentary on Newly Published ‘Clash 
of the Gods’” (新版《諸神的爭吵》辛旗的最新詮釋), China Review News, September 9, 2011, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1018/0/8/3/101808307.html?coluid=7&kindid=0&docid=101808307. Xin 
Qi’s initial book on the subject was published in 1993. 
 
115 For reference to Xin Qi’s association with the Tsinghua International Broadcasting Research Center (清华大学国际

 
59 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
传播研究中心 ), see Tsinghua University website, http://oa.law.tsinghua.edu.cn/fxy/px/staff/waipin/xinqi.htm; and 
(中国社会科学出版社学术顾问), China Social Sciences Press, at http://www.csspw.com.cn/Category_60/Index.aspx.  
 
116 See, for example, “Xin Qi: Three Conditions Needed for Negotiating Cross-Strait Peace Accord” (辛旗：两岸签署和
平协议需三条件), China Review News, August 15, 2009, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1010/4/5/7/101045713_3.html?coluid=93&kindid=2790&docid=101045713
&mdate=0815011649; “Xin Qi Expands on 17th Party Congress Taiwan Work Report” (十七大解读：辛旗十六字解读
十七大报告对台论述), Xinhua, October 19, 2010, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/newscenter/2007-
10/19/content_6909111.htm; and “Xin Qi: Necessary Road Toward Peaceful Development, Peaceful Unification” (辛
旗：和平发展，和平统一的必由之路), Zhongguang Military Network, December 4, 2012, at 
http://mil.cnr.cn/jmhdd/hxjsmt/zjft/201212/t20121204_511477356.html. For the “Peace and Development 
Committees” concept, see “Xin Qi: New Idea on Cross-Strait Peace and Development Committees” (辛旗：兩岸和平發
展委員會有新意), China Review News, May 4, 2012, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1020/9/6/5/102096557.html?coluid=33&kindid=3471&docid=102096557&
mdate=0504001241. 
 
117 For comments on Taiwan and Chinese maritime sovereignty, see “Xin Qi: Responsibility of Compatriots on Both 
Sides of the Taiwan Strait to Protect Maritime Sovereignty of the Chinese People” (辛旗：两岸同胞有责任共同维护中
华民族的海洋权益), Huaguang Network, May 8, 2013, at http://www.chbcnet.com/news/content/2013-
05/08/content_534805.htm. 
 
118 For an initial reference to a GPD/LD Liaison Bureau (联络局), or First Bureau, with a Taiwan responsibility, see (我
校闽台区域研究中心策划编辑的《台湾文献汇刊》出版座谈会 在北京人民大会堂隆重举行), Fujian Normal University 
website, January 24, 2005, at http://www3.fjnu.edu.cn/contents/sdkx/sdkx_29.htm. 
 
119 Among various sources, see Wang Mingyi, “Tracking Mainland Chinese Political-Military Taiwan-Related Think 
Tanks” (大陆党政军对台智库决策角色总体扫瞄), China Times, May 11, 1998, at 
http://forums.chinatimes.com/report/trackII/87051101.htm.  
 
120 See “Fourth Board Meeting of the Guangzhou Overseas Friendship Association” (广州海外联谊会第四届理事会) at 
http://www.gztzb.org.cn/gzswtzb/News.shtml?p5=113515. GPD Liaison Department Guangzhou Bureau (and/or 
GSD Second Department) staff officers may be assigned to the Guangdong Provincial External Liaison Office (广东省
海外联络办公室). The Guangdong External Liaison Office (广东省海外联络办公室) is located at 8 Hequn Road (合群
二马路 8 号), which is also the address given for the GPD/LD Guangzhou Bureau (see 
http://www.youbian.com/shenghuo/guangzhou_93417/). The address is also listed as one of at least two belonging 
to the Guangdong Special Region Association for International Friendly Contact (广东特区国际友好联络会). Cao 
Quanxin (曹全新) was CAIFC deputy secretary general and deputy director of the Guangdong Foreign Liaison Office 
in the 2005 timeframe.  In short, GPD/LD officers appear to be anchored within Guangzhou provincial 
party/government offices.  The Guangdong Province Fifth Office (广东省人民政府第五办公室), now known as 广东省
国际关系调研室), may be affiliated with the Guangzhou MR GSD Second Department, and the Fourth Office possibly 
GSD Second Department. See http://space.aboluowang.com/15783/viewspace-8501; and 
http://www.chinacomments.org/indx7812.htm.  
 
121 Zheng Jinpo (郑锦波; b. 1915) is another former Guangzhou Bureau director, as well as GPD Liaison Department 
deputy director. 
 
122 GPD operational units are assigned military unit cover designations (MUCDs) in the GSD block (eg. 61001-61999). 
From Fujian’s Gutian County (古田县), Lan Xiaoshi (蓝晓石) was the son of a revolutionary hero, Lan Changding (蓝
长汀; 1915-1958; also known as 蓝田).See http://www.lovenudt.com/index_biogen.asp?page=10.  He was a CAIFC 
executive board member, and as of 2011, Lan remained a consultant. See 
http://www.caifc.org.cn/en/content.aspx?id=1083. Another unconfirmed Guangzhou Liaison Bureau Director is MG 
Cai Shimin (蔡世民; b. 1944). Cai was born in Jiangxi Province and graduated from the Nanjing Foreign Language 
Institute in 1977. Upon graduation, he was assigned to the 61156 Unit in Guangzhou where he served as a 
division/office director, deputy bureau director, then bureau director (most likely should read sub-bureau vice 
bureau). Another prominent officer from the 61156 Unit is Pu Peiliang (浦培良). In April 1999, Cai was promoted to 
major general and assigned to a bureau command in Shanghai (61669 Unit). Some sources assert that Cai was GSD 
Intelligence Department, while others reflect him as GPD/LD Liaison Bureau.  The GSD Intelligence Department 
First Bureau is alleged to oversee sub-bureaus in Shanghai, Guangzhou, and other cities. A Guangzhou Liaison 

 
60 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bureau political commissar is alleged to be Fu Jun (傅军). He also has been cited as Political Commissar of the 
Guangzhou People’s Government Fifth Office (广东省人民政府第五办公室政委), and former Guangzhou MR Political 
Department Personnel Division Director (广州军区人事处处长). Fu Jun is also a CAIFC member.  Huang Chong ( 黄冲) 
is said to direct the 61669 Unit Political Department (政治部).   
 
123 For reference to a GPD/LD Southern Bureau (总政联络部南方局), see “Wenbo Gong Opening Ceremony” (文博宫
隆重开业), International Antique Artwork Trade Center website, May 11, 2011, at 
http://www.wenbogong.com/news_detail.asp?id=14&menuid=18. Wang Wei (王伟) is cited as the Southern Bureau 
director. As of January 2013, Wang Wei is one of 16 CAIFC executive board members.  See 
http://www.caifc.org.cn/content.aspx?id=504. 
 
124 The Taiwan Strait Harmonious Development Foundation (海峡两岸和谐发展基金会) director is Ren Anli (任安利; 
b. 1968). Between 1999 and 2007, Ren Anli was assigned to the GPD/LD Guangzhou Bureau.  Presumably leveraging 
the significant growth in Taiwanese investment in Dongguan City, Ren Anli was assigned as Director, Cross-Strait 
Harmonious Development Association (海峡两岸和谐发展基金会) in 2007. A funding-related dispute erupted 
between Ren and a former Association secretary general, Zhou Tianyong (周天勇), who publicly accused Ren of 
fabricating his resume.  His resume claimed that in addition to an assignment with the GPD/LD Guangzhou Liaison 
Bureau, Ren Anli had also served within the CMC Research and Investigation Bureau (中央军委调查局) and the China 
International Cultural Exchange Association (中国国际文化交流中心).  See http://www.rhhh.org/. Liu Yanjun (刘延
军) serves as the association’s secretary general. Other members include (严晓蒸), Nie Taisheng (聂台生), Zhang Ning 
(张宇), and He Wenming (何文明). At least two other staff officers within the bureau included Huang Biaoliang (黄标
梁) and Liu Zhicheng (刘志成). Liu Zhicheng served as secretary general of the Cross-Strait Harmonious Development 
Association.  
 
125 See Chen Donglong, “PLA GPD Liaison Department” (解放军总政治部), Dongsen News (Taiwan), December 2000, 
at http://www.nownews.com/2000/12/02/303-289746.htm. The Shanghai bureau may carry a cover unit 
designation of the 61669 Unit. Former director MG Cai Shimin (蔡世民; b. 1944) has been associated with both  
GPD/LD and the GSD Intelligence Department. In the 2000 timeframe, Cai Shimin was associated with the Shanghai 
City Government Fifth Office (上海市政府第五办公室), 上海市 040－052 信箱. The 61669 Political Department 
Director is Huang Zhong (黄冲), who produced a PLA propaganda program in 2006, in partnership with the Shanghai 
branch of the Chinese Cultural Promotion Association. See (八一之夜•军人之声 - 经典军乐八一史诗音乐会), at 
http://www.shcmusic.edu.cn/html/zuzhi/zhouxiaoyangejuzhongxin/yanchuxinxi/59215792858.html. The unit is 
headquartered at 15A Wukang Road Lane 280 (武康路 280 弄 15 号甲). (朱小超) serves as the Shanghai State Security 
Bureau Director, and member of the Shanghai Party Committee.  
 
126 Shanghai Association for International Friendly Contact representative include Lu Dilong (陆迪龙) as deputy 
director, and Li Qiang (李强) as secretary general. Established in August 2000, Shanghai Center for RimPac Strategic 
and International Studies (CPSIS; 上海环太国际战略中心) is focused on a range of regional security issues. The CPSIS 
Director is Guo Longlong (郭隆隆). Guo is also Deputy Director of the Shanghai Association of International Relations 
(上海国际关系学会副会长) and Shanghai Public Relations Academy (上海公共关系研究院).  Its Deputy Director is 
Wang Xiaowei, who was formerly dual hatted as director of CAIFC’s Asia Department. For an overview of the center, 
see its website: http://www.orientalstrategy.com/Gjzl.asp.  
 
127 For reference to the GPD/LD Fujian Work Station (总政联络部福建工作站), see “Why Can’t the Wu Yonghong Case 
Be Solved?” (吴永红案为什么办不了？), Viewing China, May 30, 2005, at http://m.kanzhongguo.com/node/115739.  
Another source identifies Liu Jianzong (刘建崇) as serving concurrently as Director, Fujian Provincial Government 
Fourth Office (福建省人民政府第四办公室; 福建四办), and Deputy Director, Fujian Government General Office. See 
(省政府第四办公室向湘店中心小学捐赠 100 万元), at http://www.wuping.gov.cn/Item/32791.aspx.  As of June 2012, 
the Fourth Office Director was Dong Yuhong (董玉洪), who is dual-hatted as Deputy Secretary General, Fujian 
Province Taiwan Studies Association.  Yang Libo (杨历波) is Xiamen Association for International Friendly Contact 
(XAIFC) Deputy Director and assigned with the Xiamen City Government Fourth Office (厦门市政府四办).  
 
128 http://www.kpwan.com/news/viewNewsPost.do?id=507.  Also see (福建熹龙律师事务所开业庆典隆重举行), at 
http://www.xilonglaw.com/bencandy.php?fid=163&id=644. And see 
http://www.fjww.com/news1.asp?id=1432&pd=49.  (福建省台湾研究会副秘书长) Born in 1955 and from Fujian’s 
Xianyou County, Dong Yuhong is the author of (台湾军队透视) and (马英九推动国民党党务改革任重道远). For 

 
61 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
background on Western Taiwan Strait Zone, see “State Council on Ideas to Support Fujian’s Hastening of the Western 
Taiwan Strait Economic Zone” (国务院关于支持福建省加快海峡西岸经济区建设的若干意见), at 
http://tzb.fjnu.edu.cn/s/47/t/88/0c/c6/info3270.htm. Dong Yuhong is also a Special Research Associate of the TAO 
Center for Taiwan Strait Studies (国台办海峡两岸研究中心特约研究员). 
 
129 Source (中共湖北省委对外联络处办公室) available upon request. The office director, Wang Yifa (王以发; b. 1958) 
formerly served in the Beijing MR Logistics Department Enterprise Bureau. He transferred to the GPD/LD Hubei 
office in 1994. 
 
130 For background on CAPCC, see its website at http://www.chinaapc.org/wencuhuijianjie/2013-06-28/52.html. 
Also see “CAPCC Invites Xu Shiquan to Serve on Board of Directors” (中华文化发展促进会聘请许世铨等为首批理事), 
China Taiwan Network, November 10, 2011, at http://www.taiwan.cn/tp/bwtp/201111/t20111110_2147484.htm;  and 
“Xu Shiquan and 22 Others Appointed as China Cultural Development Association Directors for First Time” (中华文
化发展促进会聘请许世铨等 22 人为首批理事), November 9, 2011, at http://www.chinanews.com/cul/2011/11-
09/3449533.shtml. It was formerly known as the Chinese People’s Cultural Promotion Association (中华民族文化促
进会). This organization should not be confused with another Chinese Cultural Promotion Society (中华文化促进会): 
see website at http://www.ccps.com.cn/ccpss/index.html. Xu Jialu replaced Liang Shi (梁湜) as director of CAPCC 
(中华文化发展促进会; 文促会). Liang Shi is likely a pseudonym for previous GPD/LD Director, LTG (ret) Liang 
Hongchang. For a summary of a cultural work meeting involving former TAO director Wang Yi, Xu Jialu, TAO Deputy 
Director Sun Yafu (孙亚夫; b. 1952), and GPD/LD Deputy Director MG Xin Qi, see “Six Programs for Pressing 
Consensus on Chinese Cultural Exchanges” (六项共识推进中华文化交流), CPPCC Conference Report, January 22, 
2011, at http://220.231.14.244:8081/zxb/zxbdetail.jsp?channelid=75007&record=204180. The report highlights the 
central role of culture in developing a new common identity on both sides of the Taiwan Strait. For another reference 
to the CAPCC leadership, see “CAPCC Deputy Secretary General Jia Chaowei Speech on China’s Cultural Renaissance” 
(中华文化发展促进会副秘书长贾超为在中华文化复兴出版工程项目发布会上的致辞), Hainan Publishing Press Release, 
April 24, 2013, at http://www.hncbs.cn/show-24-142-1.html. CAPCC is located in northern Beijing at 辛店路朗月园 1
栋 8 号. 
 
131 Zheng Jian formerly served as CAPCC Research Department Director in the 2005 timeframe. Originally from 
Qingdao, Zheng Jian is a member of CAIFC’s board of directors, a research fellow with the Peace and Development 
Center, a member of the National Society of Taiwan Studies, a special research associate with Cross-Strait Relations 
Research Center, and a director of the China Strategic Culture Promotion Association. See his brief bio on the CAPCC 
website at http://www.chinaapc.org/zuzhijiegou/mishuchang/2013-06-27/13.html. For an example of his published 
opinion pieces, see (郑剑：台海战争动因为和平须思考), China Review News, April 28, 2013, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1024/8/1/7/102481778.html?coluid=7&kindid=0&docid=102481778&mdate
=0515140415. For an even more recent and detailed editorial highlighting the “One Country, Two Systems” 
framework and the need to accelerate cross-Strait political dialogue, see (郑剑：两岸认同与互信, 仍远远不够), China 
Review News, July 21, 2013, at 
http://www.zhgpl.com/doc/1026/0/9/7/102609712.html?coluid=136&kindid=4730&docid=102609712&mdate=072
1002544. You Yueming (权月明), Jia Chaowei (贾超为; b. 1971), Shen Xuan (申煊), and Shi Yongqi (石永奇; b. 1963) 
are deputy secretary generals. You Yueming was previously CAPCC Academic Research Department director. At least 
one 2013 reference cites Jia Chaowei as an active duty officer within GPD. He is dual hatted as director of the CAPCC 
Cultural Exchange Department. Shen Xuan is a deputy director of the Beijing Association for International Friendly 
Contact.  In 2007, SCOL Shen Xuan was referenced as deputy secretary general of the Second Artillery Political 
Department. Shi Yongqi is a PLA Nanjing Political Academy graduate and is associated with Huayi. Huang Jiafa (黄加
法) serves as CAPCC General Office Director. One source from 2007 affiliates Huang Jiafa and Fu Tao (付涛) with the 
GPD/LD Taiwan Bureau (a separate source lists Fu Tao as GPD/LD First Bureau). Su Baoming (宿保平) and He Quan 
(何传) serve as mishu to the CAPCC leadership. Wu Jiang (吴江) is affiliated with the CAPCC Research Department. 
Sun Jingbo (孙京波) and Cai Bin (蔡斌) are other senior CAPCC personalities. Among various sources, see “Xin Qi 
Talks with China Review News: Ma Ying-jeou Has Pressure, Action” (辛旗语中评社：马英九有压力有动力), China 
Review News, March 11, 2012, at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/doc/docDetailCreate.jsp?coluid=118&kindid=3697&docid=102035246&page=6&mdate=0311001223.  
 
132 See “MND: Support for Cross-Strait Exchanges on Establishing a Military Security Trust Mechanism”(国防部：支
持两岸交流建立军事安全互信机制等议题), China News Network, May 30, 2013, at 
http://www.chinanews.com/mil/2013/05-30/4876213.shtml; and “Sun Yafu: Hope For Discussion on Cross-Strait 
Military Security Mechanism” (孙亚夫：希望商谈两岸军事安全机制), China Review News, June 25, 2013, at 
http://www.zhgpl.com/doc/1025/9/6/2/102596299.html?coluid=136&kindid=4711&docid=102596299&mdate=062

 
62 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
5001223. For an interesting Taiwan proposal calling for an agreement on renunciation of use of force and other 
initiatives, see (傅慰孤提出“两岸军事安全机制协议草案”), China Review News, June 25, 2013, at 
http://www.zhgpl.com/doc/1025/9/7/0/102597030.html?coluid=7&kindid=0&docid=102597030. Cross-Strait 
military trust building mechanisms were the subject of a June 2013 conference in Beijing c0-sponsored by CAPCC 
and Taiwan Cross-Strait Integration Association. Some concepts reportedly tabled by Taiwan participants are similar 
to ones outlined in Taiwan’s 2002 National Defense Report. 
 
133 For background on Huayi Audio Visual, see its website at http://www.huayiyx.com/about_v2.aspx?id=221. 
CAPCC Deputy Director Bao Lixian (鲍立衔) is dual hatted as CEO of Huayi Audio-Visual Company (中国华艺音像实
业有限公司). See “’Taiwan’s Past’ Premiers in Beijing” (“台湾往事”在京首映), CCTV, August 2004, at 
http://www.cctv.com/lm/523/51/86215.html. Incorporated in Beijing in 1986, Huayi Audio Visual began operating 
from Fuzhou as early as 1991. A graduate of the Nanjing Political Academy, Shi Yongqi (石永奇; b. 1963), is dual 
hatted as general manager and CAPCC deputy secretary general (and CAPCC Exchange Department director). See 
http://www.china-maoxie.com.cn/cp/html/?1240.html. He is also a member of the CAIFC board of directors. The 
general manager of the Jiangsu subsidiary of Huayi Audio Visual Company is Xia Gengyuan (夏庚元), who was 
reportedly a division director of an unidentified Nanjing Military Region department. 
 
134 See “Cross-Strait Cultural Institutions Jointly Sponsor Special Art Exhibition on the History of Zheng Chenggong" 
(两岸文化出版机构合办“郑成功史迹图片特展”), China News Network, April 29, 2012, at 
http://news.jschina.com.cn/system/2012/04/28/013243875.shtml. 
 
135 For reporting on a joint CAPCC-China Review News conference (两岸关系和平发展学术研讨会) in December 2010, 
see (两岸三地重要专家深圳研讨和平发展), China Review News (中国评论通讯社), December 12, 2010, at 
http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-webapp/doc/docDetailCNML.jsp?coluid=118&kindid=3700&docid=101527782. In 
September 2012, CAPCC hosted a conference on Hainan Island in conjunction with the Guangdong Asia-Pacific 
Region Development Studies Center (广东省亚太地区发展研究中心) in order to promote cross-Strait cooperation in 
resolving regional maritime disputes. For reporting on the CAPCC Hainan conference, see (两岸退役将领和专家学者
研讨共同维护中华民族领土主权和海洋权益), Xinhua, September 11, 2012, http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2012-
09/11/c_123702718.htm. 
 
136 Prominent figures include AMS World Military Research Department (军事科学院世界军事研究部) Director MG 
Wang Weixing (王卫星), and AMS Center for Taiwan Strait Studies (军事科学院台海研究中心) Director Bai Guangwei 
(白光炜). Wang Weixing has directed the Center for Taiwan Strait Studies in the past and is sometimes still carried as 
the center’s director. For an example of Wang Weixing’s writings, see “Common Responsibility of Militaries on Both 
Sides of the Taiwan Strait” (海峡两岸军人的共同职责), Outlook Weekly, 2007 (Vol 50), at 
http://lw.xinhuanet.com/htm/content_2364.htm. 
 
137 For reference to the GPD/LD Investigation and Research Bureau (调查研究局), see Wang Mingyi, “Tracking 
Mainland Chinese Political-Military Taiwan-Related Think Tanks” (大陆党政军对台智库决策角色总体扫瞄), China 
Times, May 11, 1998, at http://forums.chinatimes.com/report/trackII/87051101.htm. 
 
138 See David Shambaugh, “China’s International Relations Think Tanks: Evolving Structure and Process,” China 
Quarterly, Vol. 171 (2002), pp. 575-96; Michael D. Swaine, The Role of the Chinese Military in National Security 
Policymaking (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1998), pp. 67-68; and Evan Medeiros, “Agents of Inﬂuence: Assessing the 
Role of Chinese Foreign Policy Research Organizations after the 16th Party Congress,” in Andrew Scobell and Larry 
Wortzel (eds), Civil-Military Change In China: Elites, Institutes, and Ideas After The 16th Party Congress  (Wash DC: 
2004), pp. 279-308, at http://www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil/pdffiles/pub413.pdf. 
 
139 Among its many programs, CAIFC (中国国际友好联络会; 友联会) has hosted a dialogue with respected senior U.S. 
retired military officers since 2008. In the U.S. dialogue, media reporting cites former GSD Second Department 
Director Xiong Guangkai as leading the CAIFC delegation up until 2010, with MG Li Xiaohua serving as delegation 
secretary general. In addition to GPD/LD Director MG Xing Yunming, participants have included a former PLAAF 
commander, former Military Region commanders, former NDU Commandant, and a former East Sea Fleet 
commander. CAIFC also has engaged retired senior military officers from Western Europe, Japan, and other locations. 
For additional background into CAIFC and GPD/LD, see John Garnaut, “China Gets into the Business of Making 
Friends,” Sydney Morning Herald, May 25 2013, at http://www.smh.com.au/world/china-gets-into-the-business-of-
making-friends-20130524-2k6q3.html?skin=text-only. 
 
140 Two of the three CAIFC deputy secretary generals are: 1) Deng Wenqing (邓文庆), who was previously with 

 
63 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
CAIFC’s Asia Department; and 2) Chen Jun (陈军), who formerly directed CAIFC’s Eastern Europe/Central Asia 
Division. A prominent assistant to the CAIFC director is Lu Wei (吕葳), who was formerly CAIFC’s Americas Division 
Deputy Director in the 2001 timeframe 
 
141 GPD/LD directors have been Jin Li (1984-1990), Ye Xuanning (1990-1998), Liang Hongchang (1998-2007), and 
Xing Yunming (2007-present). LTG (ret) Liang Hongchang appears to employ a pseudonym of Liang Shi (梁湜). For 
references to Liang Shi as CAIFC executive deputy director, see “New Years Message” Peace and Development, 
January 2002, at http://d.wanfangdata.com.cn/periodical_hpyfz200201001.aspx; and 中日及东北亚安全形势国际研
讨会”在北京举行, Huaxia Jingwei (华夏经纬网), December 5, 2001, at 
http://www.huaxia.com/xw/dlxw/2001/12/225200.html. 
 
142 Xu Kuangdi (徐匡迪; b. 1937) has served as honorary director since at least 2009. Xu was mayor of Shanghai 
between 1995 and 2001 and subsequently a vice chairman of the CPPCC. He also chairs the China-U.S. People’s 
Friendship Association (CUSPFA). 
 
143 When first formed in December 1984, Wang Zhen served as honorary chairman The first CAIFC director was 
Huang Hua (黄华; also known as Wang Rumei), Ye Jianying’s former mishu. GPD/LD Director Jin Li was executive 
director of CAIFC. The four initial deputy directors included Guangdong native Ke Hua (柯华), a former diplomat and 
leading advisor on Hong Kong/Macao issues; GPD/LD Deputy Director Yue Feng (岳枫; also known as Ye Xuanning); 
GPD/LD Deputy Director Chen Hua (陈华); and Xiao Rong (萧榕; also known as Deng Rong).  
 
144 Deng Rong (邓榕; b. 1950) was a GPD/LD researcher.  Her husband is said to be former Polytechnologies CEO He 
Ping (贺平). 
 
145 See “Professor Xu Jialu (许嘉璐教授),  
http://www.confucianism.sdu.edu.cn/html/xueshutuandui/2010/0430/406.html.  
 
146 http://www.legaldaily.com.cn/locality/content/2011-07/19/content_2800302.htm?node=30954. Xu Jialu served 
with the Office of Chinese Language Council International (中国国家汉语国际推广领导小组办公室; or 汉办), and has 
been a professor with the Beijing Normal University College of Chinese Language and Culture. 
 
147Liao Gui-ru, “Beijing Stresses Shared Culture Across Taiwan Strait,” Want China Times, January 28, 2011, at 
http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20110128000058&cid=1101.  
 
148 For an example of Xu Jialu’s early affiliation with state security, see Li Chunli, "Thunder of the Rising Sun" Movie 
Discloses Attempt to Assassinate Mao Zedong” (影片《旭日惊雷》披露刺杀毛泽东未遂事件), Guangming Daily, 
March 27, 1998, at http://www.gmw.cn/01gmrb/1998-03/27/GB/17644%5EGM2-2713.HTM. The movie 
commemorated the fifth anniversary of the PRC National Security Law (中华人民共和国国家安全法. For a discussion 
of Xu Jialu and Taiwan, see http://szdaily.sznews.com/html/2009-03/23/content_558591.htm. Xu also directs the 
Chinese Social Assistance Foundation (中华社会救助基金会); and the China Great Wall Society (中国长城学会). 
 
149 Chen Haosu (陈昊苏; b. 1942) also has served as chairman of the Chinese People's Association for Friendship with 
Foreign Countries. 
 
150 Guo Zhenyuan (郭震远) is also a special research associate (特约研究员) with the Cross-Strait Relations Research 
Center (海峡两岸关系研究中心), which supports the TALSG Office 
 
151 CAIFC honorary chairman Xu Kuangdi serves as an honorary CUSEF advisor. After graduating from the Beijing 
Broadcasting Academy, Liu Changle was allegedly affiliated with the GPD Propaganda Department, and assigned to 
China National Radio’s military division in 1983. Ye Xuanning is allegedly close to Liu Changle. For one speculative 
assessment, see (先有耿飙后有叶选宁 习近平在军中屡有贵人), Boxun, October 21, 2012, at 
http://boxun.com/news/gb/china/2012/10/201210211007.shtml#.Ug4-yJJ9BKc. For background on Liu Changle, 
see Philip P. Pan, “Making Waves, Carefully, on the Air in China,” Washington Post, September 19, 2005, at 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/09/18/AR2005091801597.html. 
 
152 Zhou Xinzheng (周新政) appears to have been appointed as director of the Center for Peace and Development 
Studies (和平与发展研究中心) in 2013, replacing Gao Yuan (高原). Previous Deputy Director Gan Suqing (甘苏庆; b. 
1950; aka 甘露) was in place in the 2004 timeframe. Another former director is Gao Haikuan (高海宽). Zhou 

 
64 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
Xinzheng and CPDS Deputy Director Wang Xiaowei (王霄巍) were previously dual hatted as CAIFC Asia Department 
directors. Current Asia Department director is Shao Hongwei (邵宏伟; b. 1966). Former director of CAIFC’s Korea 
Division, Li Chun (李春), is the Asia Department deputy director. The center has a relationship with the Jiangsu 
Province Association for Friendly Contact’s Asia-Pacific Research Center (友联会亚太研究中心) and Shanghai Center 
for RimPac Strategic and International Studies (CPSIS; 上海环太国际战略中心). Researchers include Du Rubo (杜汝
波). Among various sources, see http://www.orientalstrategy.com/index.asp.  
 
153 The Nishan Forum Organization Committee (尼山论坛组委会) maintains close relationships with the China 
National Office for Teaching Chinese as a Foreign Language (also known as Hanban), Confucius Institute 
Headquarters, Phoenix TV, the United Nations Education, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and the 
Billy Graham Evangelical Association.  For background on the Nishan Organizing Committee, see “CAIFC Participates 
in and Holds the ‘Nishan Forum’,” CAIFC Press Release, September 27, 2010, at 
http://www.caifc.org.cn/en/content.aspx?id=795; and “CAIFC Participates in Holding the 2nd ‘Nishan Forum’,” 
CAIFC Press Release, May 23, 2012, at http://www.caifc.org.cn/en/content.aspx?id=2445. 
 
154 Among various sources, see “Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations,” UN General Assembly Resolution 
56/6, November 21, 2001, at http://www.un.org/documents/ares566e.pdf; and “Statement by Chinese Permanent 
Representative Ambassador Wang Guangya at UNGA 60th Session on Global Agenda for Dialogue among 
Civilizations and Culture of Peace,” Permanent PRC Mission to the UN Press Release, October 20, 2005, at 
http://www.china-un.org/eng/hyyfy/t217669.htm.  Commemorating the birthplace of Confucius, the first Nishan 
Forum was held in Shandong’s Nishan in September 2010, with a theme of “Harmony with Diversity and the 
Harmonious World.”  The second Nishan Forum was held in May 2012, and the third is scheduled to be held in Jinan 
in 2014. As a side note, the United States has reportedly provided as much as 20% of UNESCO’s funding. Support for 
UNESCO was frozen in 2011 after UNESCO agreed to grant Palestine membership. 
 
155 For background on the Philanthropy Forum(中国公益论坛), see  http://www.caijing.com.cn/2012/ltlsh/ 
 
156 For background on the Sanya International Finance Forum (三亚财经国际论坛), see http://www.sanyaforum.org/.  
 
157 For an excellent overview of China Energy Fund Committee (中华能源基金委员会), see Andrew Chubb and John 
Garnaut, “The Enigma of CEFC’s Chairman Ye,” South China Sea Conversations, June 7, 2013, at 
http://southseaconversations.wordpress.com/tag/chairman-ye/. Also see the CEFC website at 
http://index.chinaenergyfund.org/articles/?do=list&catalog_id=977 
 
158 China Huaxin (中国华信能源有限公司) senior advisory board members include a number of former PLA Navy East 
Sea Fleet political commissars, such as VADM (ret) Liu Weidong (刘卫东) and RADM (ret) Wei Liru (韦立汝). Also 
listed is RADM Liu Sumin (刘苏闽), political commissar of the East Sea Fleet as of June 2013; RADM (ret) Lu Dekang 
(陆德康), former PLA Naval Air Force political commissar, RADM (ret) Cui Tonghe (崔同贺); and MG (ret) Dai 
Changyou (戴长友; b. 1946), former political commissar of the PLA Shanghai Garrison. See “China Huaxin Party 
Committee Meeting on Establishment of Discipline Inspection Commission” (中国华信党委纪委成立大会), CEFC 
website, January 17, 2013, at http://www.cefc.co/news.php?id=276&&te=01&&type=2013. For reference to China 
Huaxin Party Committee and its relationship with the Shanghai City Party Committee, see 
http://www.cefc.co/news.php?id=276&&te=01&&type=2013. 
 
159 Although speculative, one analysis posits that Ye Jianming may be related to former GPD/LD director Ye 
Xuanning. For an assessment of Ye Jianming and Ye Xuanning, see Andrew Chubb and John Garnaut, “The Enigma 
of CEFC’s Chairman Ye,” South China Sea Conversations, June 7, 2013, at 
http://southseaconversations.wordpress.com/tag/chairman-ye/. Huaxin subsidiaries include the Shanghai Huaxin 
Energy Holdings Corporation (上海市华信能源控股有限公司), China Huaxin Energy Co, Ltd (中国华信能源有限公司), 
Huaxin Energy Holdings (华信能源控股有限公司), Fujian Huaxin Holding Company (福建华信控股股份有限公司), 
and Shanghai Dasheng Commercial Company (上海大生商业有限公司). For reference to Ye Jianming and CAIFC, see 
“CEFC International Ltd,” Financial Times Markets Data, April 12, 2013, at 
http://markets.ft.com/Research/Markets/Tearsheets/Directors-and-dealings?s=Y35:SES. For reference to Ye 
Jianming with CAIFC’s Shanghai branch, see “Sun East - Announcement of Appointment Of Executive Chairman, 
Sun East Group announcement, January 18, 2012, at http://sgx.i3investor.com/servlets/anpth/56957.jsp. Huaxin is 
headquartered in the Shanghai suburb of Xujiahui.  Ye Jianming also directs the Shanghai Energy Security Research 
Center (上海能源安全研究中心). An alternate hypothesis is that Ye Jianming could be a grandson of Ye Fei (叶飞; 
1914-1999). For background on the China Institute of Culture (中国文化院), see http://www.cefc-culture.co/#. 
 

 
65 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
160 For reference to the Hainan-based Maritime Security and Cooperation Academy (海洋安全与合作研究院), see 
(2013 年政治学与国际关系学术共同体会议简讯), Tsinghua University website, May 31, at 
http://www.tsinghua.edu.cn/publish/iis/7249/2013/20130603092153775319464/20130603092153775319464_.htm
l; and “Chinese Domestic Scholars Hold Conference: The World is Not Japan’s” (国内外学者在京召开研讨会：琉球不
是日本的), Military Express Network, May 2, 2013, at 
http://www.bxzh.net/xinwen/zhanluepingshu/2013/0522/8908.html. LTG (ret) Xu Genchu (徐根初; b. 1943) directs 
the Center for National Strategic Studies. Deng Zhenghui (邓峥晖) serves as Assistant to the Director (Zhuang 
Jianzhong; 庄建中; b. 1942), CEFC Shanghai Office. Other prominent CEFC figures include former Hong Kong 
Secretary for Home Affairs Patrick CP Ho (何志平; b. 1950), Zhang Ya (張雅), Gao Yonghong (高永红), and Andrew Lo 
(路祥安), formerly CH Tung's special assistant. CH Tung is said to have brought Andrew Lo from his shipping 
company over to serve in the HK government.  See Christine Loh, Underground Front: The Chinese Communist 
Party in Hong Kong (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2010), p. 218. Zhang Ya (张雅) appeared to have been 
deputy director of CEFC’s U.S. division and has also directed CEFC’s Internal Research Department (內研部). In May 
2011, CEFC established a subordinate Shanghai China-Trust Welfare Charity Foundation (上海华信公益基金会).For 
background, see its website at: http://www.chinacwcf.org/. Other key figures include former State Administration for 
Religious Affairs Director Ye Xiaowen (叶小文; b. 1950); Phoenix TV’s Liu Changle; Confucius Institute Headquarters 
Director Xu Lin, and Zhang Jiyu (张继禹).   
 
161 For reference to Zhang Wu (张武), see (尼山论坛组委会与联合国文明联盟工作会议), Nishan Forum Press Release, 
June 6, 2012, at http://www.nishan.org.cn/ltly/jsbd/201206/t20120605_7190112.htm. For reference to Zhang Wu 
within CAIFC’s Americas Department, see (友联会举办“美国亚太安全政策及中美关系” 研讨会), CAIFC Press Release, 
January 6, 2011, at http://www.caifc.org.cn/content.aspx?id=362; “Opening of the Nishan Forum Planning Meeting” 
(尼山论坛筹备会议召开), Nishan website, February 7, 2010, at 
http://www.nishan.org.cn/news/xwdt/201005/t20100514_5532436.html; and“CAIFC Visits Guam University” (友联
会访问关岛大学), GAIFC website, August 10, 2011, at http://www.gaifc.org.cn/showlink2.Asp?id=108. Liu Yadong 
(刘亚东; b. 1962), who previously served as executive assistant to  is listed as CEFC’s U.S. representative office 
director. 
 
162 CEFC consultants include former NPC Vice Chairman and current Taiwan Studies Association Director Cheng 
Siwei; former director of the State Council Religious Affairs Bureau Ye Xiaowen; and Wang Zhenmin, a respected 
legal scholar specializing in Taiwan and Hong Kong constitutional law. CEFC has sponsored a series of U.S.-China 
conferences on strategy in the Asia-Pacific region. Participants have included former U.S. senior military, intelligence, 
and security policy officials, and the most recent event included Japanese representatives. Participants on the Chinese 
side included Wang Xiangsui (王湘穗), one of the authors of the controversial book “Unrestricted Warfare.”  
 
163 The Nishan Forum collaborated with CEFC for an event at the United Nations in New York in November 2012 that 
addressed commonalities between Confucianism and Christianity. For reference to the New York event, see “New 
York Forum on World Civilizations,” November 10-12, 2012, at http://info.nyforum2012.org/. Among various sources, 
see “Nishan Forum Organizing Committee Holds Domestic Forum on Academic Quality” (尼山论坛组委会就论坛学术
质量召开国内学者座谈会), Chinese Cultural Symbolic City Press Release, August 24, 2008, at 
http://www.ccsc.gov.cn/whnhjs/201008/t20100824_5780911.html.  
 
164 For reference to GPD/LD responsibility for external propaganda, see Anna-Marie Brady, Marketing Dictatorship: 
Propaganda and Thought Work in Contemporary China (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2009), p. 26. For 
an overview of military propaganda work, see Chen Hui and Wang Yitao, (对外军事宣传的传播学解读), August 3, 
2004, Shanghai Journalism Review, at 
http://xwjz.eastday.com/eastday/xwjz/node27685/node27687/userobject1ai408170.html. 
 
165 GPD’s 2003 Political Work Guidelines describe the Three Warfares in the context of disintegration “enemy work” 
(开展瓦解敌军工作), as well as “counter-psychological operations” (开展反心战) and “counter-subversion” (反策反工
作). See “GPD Political Work Guidelines (2003),” at 
http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/64162/71380/102565/182142/10993467.html; and Fu Jiangtao (付江涛) and Cai 
Xueqin (蔡雪芹), “Military Political Work Affairs” (军队政治工作事务) (Beijing: Blue Sky Press, 2011), pp. 183-196. 
For further background on the Three Warfares, see “Chinese Military Initiates Public Opinion, Psychological, and 
Legal Warfare Research and Training” (中国军队开展舆论战、心理战、法律战研究和训练), Xinhua, June 21, 2004, at 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/mil/2004-06/21/content_1538252.htm. Among various U.S. sources, see Timothy A. 
Walton, China’s Three Warfares (Herndon, VA: Delex Consulting, 2012).  
 

 
66 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
166 Fu Jiangtao (付江涛) and Cai Xueqin (蔡雪芹), “Military Political Work Affairs” (军队政治工作事务) (Beijing: Blue 
Sky Press, 2011), pp. 183-188. 
 
167 For reference to GPD/LD and Huayi Broadcasting Corporation (中国华艺广播公司) propaganda cooperation, see 
“Cultural ‘Soft Power’: The Foundation for Promoting Cross-Strait Unification” (文化“软实力”：促进两岸统一的基础), 
Xinhua, June 11, 2013, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2013-06/11/c_116112684.htm. 
 
168 See Zheng Yong and He Zaipeng, “Wuyuan Culture and Taiwan Network Propaganda” (五缘文化与对台网络宣传), 
Renminwang, April 8, 2013, at http://media.people.com.cn/n/2013/0408/c360577-21056390.html. The authors are 
affiliated with the China Huayi Broadcasting Company’s Huaguang Network (中国华艺广播公司华广网). The 
Huaguang news outlet is at: http://www.chbcnet.com/. Also see “The Extraordinary Power of Network Psychological 
Operations” (网络心理战’威力不凡) PLA Daily, December 18, 2002, at 
http://www.pladaily.com.cn/big5/pladaily/2002/12/18/20021218001145_todaynews.html. 
 
169 For examples of ad hominem targeting of perceived members of the “China threat” school, see “Who Attacks 
China” (谁在恶毒攻击中国), Global People, December 18, 2006, at 
http://world.people.com.cn/GB/14549/5180287.html; and Joel Martinson, “Who Has it In for China,” Danwei, 
December 20, 2006, at http://www.danwei.org/magazines/who_has_it_in_for_china.php. Also see Wang Jinyan (王
晋燕),“Shi Mingkai, Using Fear to Make Money from Taiwan” (石明凯,靠吓唬台湾赚大钱), Global People, September 
16, 2008, at http://paper.people.com.cn/hqrw/html/2008-09/16/content_114532.htm. The latter represents a direct 
ad hominem attack against one individual with intent to discredit associates, using internet search optimization 
techniques. For a response issued through Taiwan media, see “China Spreads Network Fire, Sends Forces to Suppress 
Shi Mingkai” (中國撒火「網」,撻伐石明凱), Xinxinwen, October 30, 2008, at 
http://tw.magv.com/privew.aspx?MUID=53288.  
 
170 For a general discussion of psychological operations, see “Psychological Operations – The Fourth Kind of Warfare” 
(心理战——第四种战争), at http://www.hurf.gov.cn/rftd/ShowArticle.asp?ArticleID=187; and Dean Cheng, “Winning 
Without Fighting: The Chinese Psychological Warfare Challenge,” Heritage Backgrounder, July 12, 2013, at 
http://www.heritage.org/research/commentary/2013/7/winning-a-war-without-fighting For background on 
targeting value concepts (价值概念) and other aspects of psychological operations, see Ma Zhong (马忠), 
Psychological Operations and Perfecting PLA Enemy Disintegration Work”  (心战科学与完善我军瓦解敌军工作), Xian 
Political Academy Journal (西安政治学院学报), January 2000. For commentary on the central role of the internet, see 
Chris Buckley, “China PLA officers Call Internet Key Battleground,” Reuters, June 3, 2011, at 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/06/03/us-china-internet-google-idUSTRE7520OV20110603. Also see “MG Xu 
Yan Discusses Influence of Network Psychological Operations Toward China” (徐焰少将谈现代网络心理战对我国的影
响), Reminwang, January 18, 2013, at http://live.people.com.cn/note.php?id=697100331132802_ctdzb_001.  
 
171 For a good summaries of legal warfare and relevance for operations in space, see Larry M. Wortzel, “The Chinese 
People's Liberation Army and Space Warfare,” AEI Online, October 17, 2007, at http://www.aei.org/papers/foreign-
and-defense-policy/regional/asia/the-chinese-peoples-liberation-army-and-space-warfare/; and Dean Cheng, 
“Winning Without Fighting: Chinese Legal Warfare,” Heritage Foundation Backgrounder, May 21, 2012, at 
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/05/winning-without-fighting-chinese-legal-warfare.. 
 
172 For background on Dongfang Yi, see the association’s website at: http://www.dongfangyi.org/ 
 
173 “Tsinghua University Establishes Future Media Warfare Research Lab” (清华大学未来舆论战研究室), Dongfang Yi 
News Release, June 1, 2012, at http://www.dongfangyi.org/tuozhanshiye/tuozhanzhikulianmeng/2012-06-
01/tuozhan9168.html. 
 
174 See “Dongfang Yi Military Law Research Center Holds Opening Ceremony” (’ 东方毅’军事法研究中心揭牌仪式举行), 
China Political Law University Press Release, May 16, 2010, at http://www.sinoss.net/2010/0516/21684.html.  For a 
summary of a legal warfare conference, see (第五届中国政法大学东方毅军事法论坛胜利闭幕), Dongfang Yi News 
Release, June 27, 2011, at http://www.dongfangyi.org/tuozhanshiye/dongfangyijunshifaluntan/tuozhan3557.html. 
Participants included former GPD/LD Deputy Director MG (ret) Du Rubo; CAPT Xing Guangmei (邢广梅), who 
directs thePLA Navy Military Academic Research Institute’s Legal Research Lab (海军军事学术研究所法律研究室), 
and PLAAF Command Academy’s Political Work Division SCOL Wang Ji (王继; b. 1954) among others. Other projects 
include the TAO and CPPCC administrative buildings, Public Security Bureau detention centers, and scholarships and 
other grants to a range of institutions. An affiliate of the Dongfang Yi is the Future Group (未来集团) and a 

 
67 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
commercial construction business. 
 
175 “Chinese Domestic Scholars Hold Conference: The World is Not Japan’s” (国内外学者在京召开研讨会：琉球不是日
本的), Military Express Network, May 2, 2013, at 
http://www.bxzh.net/xinwen/zhanluepingshu/2013/0522/8908.html. Dongfang Yi also has established the Research 
Center for Cultural Strategy within the Southwest University for Political Science and Law (西南政法大学东方毅文化
战略研究中心); and an Ideological Expansion Research Center within the China University for International Relations 
(国际关系学院东方毅拓展思想研究中心). 
 
176 Originally from Shandong Province, Du Rubo was a member of a team that published a basic modern psychological 
warfare operational theory text in 1990, and is believed to have contributed toward the development of the “Three 
Warfares.” His most recent study on psychological warfare was recognized by the All-China Philosophy and Social 
Science Planning Office. In the 1990s, he served as CAIFC deputy secretary general. He also had a tour as an 
instructor at the Shijiazhuang Military Academy. For reference to his psychological operations work, see Wen Jinquan, 
Du Rubo, and Zhou Min, Introduction to Psychological Warfare (心理战概论) (Beijing: NDU Press, 1990). MG (ret) 
Du Rubo became honorary chairman of the China Red Culture Institute (中国红色文化研究院) upon his retirement. 
He also goes by Du Bo (杜波). Working his way up the GPD/LD ladder, Du Rubo most likely replaced Zeng Xiaodong 
as GPD/LD Deputy Director upon her retirement from active duty in the 2007 timeframe. China Red Culture Institute 
was established in September 2009. Gen (ret) Chi Haotian (迟浩田) serves as a vice chairman. For background, see 
the China Red Culture Institute website at http://www.mzx1226.com/. Among other responsibilities, the All-China 
Philosophy and Social Science Planning Office (全国哲学社会科学规划办公室) grants funding for social science-
related research. 
 
177 Malcomb Moore, “China Launches 'Red Culture' Drive,” The Telegraph, May 3, 2011, at  
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/8489484/China-launches-Red-Culture-drive.html.   
http://www.mzx1226.com/. Established in September 2009, the China Red Cultural Institute (中国红色文化研究) is a 
key component of a CCP propaganda drive to balance the embrace of capitalism with a revolutionary communist 
spirit, reunite Chinese society – and Taiwan – under a red flag, and emerge victorious in the cultural struggle against 
foreign powers. For reference to GPD/LD and Du Rubo’s membership on its board of directors (~2009), see the 
United Front Theory Research Association (中国统一战线理论研究会) website at: 
http://www.zytzb.org.cn/web/yanjiuhui/bhjj/200902/t20090211_545262.html 
 
178 Honorary Chairman Li Erping (李而炳; b. 1945) previously served as Xu Xiangqian’s personal mishu, was a senior 
staff member within the GSD Intelligence Department, and Political Commissar of the PLA International Relations 
Academy. Dongfang Yi Chairman, Guo Yi (过毅; b. 1962), appears to have been affiliated with the Academy of Military 
Sciences, and is an honorary faculty member of the PLA GSD Army Aviation Academy. MG (ret) Du Rubo (杜汝波; b. 
1952) and MG (ret) Yang Chunchang (杨春长; b. 1949) are deputy directors. Among various sources, see Zhang 
Hongyun, “Be the Hawk Faction, Not Doves”(要鹰派 不要鸽派), Dongfang Yi, June 20, 2012, at 
http://www.dongfangyi.org/tuozhanwenhua/junjingzhushi/2012-06-20/10618.html. Also see 
http://xgb.lzu.edu.cn/WebSite/Head/Show.aspx?Id=6567.  
 
179 A base is a functional PLA organization. For purposes of comparison, commanders and political commissars of 
GAD and Second Artillery bases have grades equal to a corps leader or corps deputy leader. GAD bases, numbered 20 
through 33, carry out satellite launch, space tracking, satellite control, and weapons testing. Second Artillery missile 
bases, numbered 51 through 56, consist of between three and eight launch brigades and at least five support 
regiments. For example, 52 Base oversees six conventionally-capable that are oriented against Taiwan. 
 
180 Media reporting highlights 311 Base cooperation with figures such as ARATS Vice Chairman and Taiwan 
Propaganda Leading Small Group member Zhang Mingqing (张铭清), GPD/LD Deputy Director Xin Qi, GPD/LD 
(CAPCC secretary general) Zheng Jian, and TALSG Office Propaganda Bureau Director Yang Yi (杨毅). Yang Yi is dual 
hatted as the State Council TAO spokesperson. Zhang Mingqing was assistant to the director of the TALSG Office 
between 1993 and 2006, propaganda bureau director (and TAO spokesman). In addition to his ARATS position, he 
heads Xiamen University’s School of Journalism and Communication (厦门大学新闻传播学院). Among various 
sources, see “Major Propaganda Event ‘The Story of Taiwanese Business Prosperity on the Mainland’ Opens in 
Wenzhou” (大型宣传活动《大陆台商财富故事》今日温州收官), Huaguang Network, December 19, 2012, at 
http://www.chbcnet.com/news/content/2012-12/19/content_445097.htm. For reporting on Xin Qi, 311 Base 
Commander Wang Shu. Zheng Jian, and others, see “Major Series of Xinhai Centennial Anniversary Events Opens in 
Wuhan” (“百年复兴忆辛亥”大型系列活动在武汉正式启动), Huaguang Network, April 15, 2011, at 
http://www.chbcnet.com/tg/2011-04/15/content_263694.htm. 

 
68 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
181 The 311 Base (61716 Unit) has been referred to as the GPD Public Opinion, Psychological Operations, and Legal 
Warfare Base (舆论战心理战法律战基地). For reference to the 311 Base, see “Zhu Haihang” (宋海航), Xinhua, October 
31, 2011, at http://www.ah.xinhuanet.com/2011-10/31/c_112722519.htm; and “Letter Submitted on Dual Use Work 
Situation” (关于报送双拥工作有关情况的函), China Financial Pension Network October 29, 2008, at 
http://fj.cnpension.net/shebao/fujian/fagui/630954.html.  The 311 Base (61716 Unit) is directed by MG Wang Shu 
(王树 or 汪澍 b. 1958). Since July 2011, the political commissar has been MG Yin Hongwen (尹洪文). Before his 
assignment with the 311 Base, Yin was director of the Nanjing MR Political Department Organization Department, 
and 1st Group Army 1st Division political commissar. He was promoted to MG in 2012. For linkage of Yin Hongwen 
with the 61716 Unit, see http://www.fjsen.com/a/2011-12/03/content_7041452.htm. Deputy directors include You 
Yingqi (游英其) and Liu Fuzhang (刘福章). The base chief engineer (总工程师) is Zhang Hongwu (张红武).  
 
182 The 311 base Network Propaganda Center (网络宣传中心) appears to carry a military unit cover designation of the 
61070 Unit. The center is directed by Zhu Leiming (朱磊明). A 2012 sports announcement reported a Zhu Leiming as 
affiliated with the 61716 Unit,, which oversees the 61070 Unit: 
http://www.pingpang.info/bbs/IndivGroup_Dispbbs.asp?GroupID=16&groupboardid=11&id=4040. For reference to 
Zhu Leiming as the 311 Base Network Center director, see (全省网络新闻宣传干部培训连城开班), Minxi Daily, 
November 4, 2009, at http://www.mxrb.cn/zwpd/2009-11/04/content_610379.htm.In addition to leveraging the 
internet for propaganda, the unit may have a computer network operations mission. The 61070 Unit has produced 
studies associated with media access control (MAC) spoofing and an information push system (信息推送系统). See (基
于可信平台和可信引擎的软件设计方法), Hebei S&T Department website (undated), at 
http://cg.hebstd.gov.cn/xssc/xxxmlb.aspx?xmbh=20134274. The 61070 Unit is headquartered in Fuzhou’s Gulou 
District, #3 Meifeng Road (梅峰路 3 号). 
 
183 Other affiliated entities include the 61590 Unit, 61023 Unit, 61198 Unit, 61275 Unit, and 61839 Unit. The 61590 
Unit is located in Fuzhou and appears to be linked with the Huayi Broadcasting Company’s Television Center. The 
center develops television programming for broadcast by CCTV, Phoenix TV, and other outlets. For linkage of CHBC, 
the television center, and 61716 Unit, see (福建省第六届百花文艺奖拟获奖作品名单公示公告), Dongnan Network, 
May 24, 2011, at http://www.fjsen.com/c/2011-05/24/content_4629778_4.htm. Also see “CHBC Television Center” 
(中国华艺广播公司电视中心), China Taiwan Network, September 2, 2010, at 
http://www.taiwan.cn/zt/jlzt/straits2010/xgzl/201009/t20100902_1512692.htm. Based on Fuzhou City, the 61023 
Unit oversees editorial (编辑部) and technical departments (技术部) It also  maintains offices in Beijing (北京記者站). 
The 61198 Unit appears to be collocated with the base headquarters compound in Fuzhou’s Gulou District (鼓楼区). 
The specific address is 77 Meizhu Road (梅竹路 77 号). Members of the unit have published studies on US 
psychological warfare, and may be affiliated with the 61716 Unit translation office. The 61275 Unit is likely a 
regimental-grade unit under VTS in the Gutian area. Located in Ningde’s Gutian County (古田县), the 61275 Unit was 
previously assigned a military cover designation of 73505, indicating the entity was subordinate to Nanjing MR at one 
time. Among various sources, see http://www.fj.xinhuanet.com/news/2008-09/27/content_17603035.htm. The 
61839 Unit is the VTS Xiamen Broadcasting Station (峡之声广播电台厦门宣传站). For reference to 61839 Unit and 
propaganda, see (精神文明建设先进集体、先进个人名单), Siming District website, December 30, 2010, at 
http://www.siming.gov.cn/smgk/jswmjs/wjhb/201103/t20110323_37491.htm. which located on 虎园路 5 号. 
 
184 GPD incorporated CHBC in 1991. For background on China Huayi Broadcasting, see its website at 
http://www.chbcnet.com/about/ys.htm. Formerly under the Nanjing MR, CHBC was subordinated to the 311 Base 
upon its establishment. Wang Shu is also listed as the CEO of CHBC. When referencing Wang Shu in his CHBC 
persona, the characters 汪澍 are used instead of 王树. Another example is former 311 Base commander MG Deng 
Changyu (邓长宇; b. 1954), who commanded the 61716 Unit between 2005 and 2010. He has been also been reported 
as CEO of CHBC. See (第四届福州青岛啤酒节盛大开启举城狂欢), Tsingtao Southeast Company website, August 9, 
2010, at http://www.tsingtaose.com.cn/Article/ShowArticle.asp?ArticleID=1438. Song Haihang (宋海航) served as 
the first 311 Base political commissar. He is also reflected as CHBC CEO. For reference to Song Haihang as CHBC 
CEO, see (“中华文化之旅”活动人员河南新郑拜谒黄帝), Huaxia, June 2, 2010, at 
http://www.huaxia.com/zt/zhwh/10-020/1913919.html.  
 
185 VTS was previously known as the PLA Fujian Frontline Broadcasting Station (解放军福建前线广播电台), which 
was formed in August 1958. The unit was under the authority of GPD/LD. For background on VTS, see its website at: 
http://www.vos.com.cn/index.shtml. VTS may be affiliated with a military cover designation of the 61985 Unit. Liu 
Linlan (柳林岚) is dual hatted as the 61985 Unit commander and general manager of the Huayi Broadcasting 
Corporation. For reference to Liu as general manager of Huayi Broadcasting, see Dai Fang “Tianfuxi Treasure Island, 

 
69 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
Expansion Compatriot Feelings” (天府系宝岛, 同胞情更长), CCPPR website, February 23, 2010, at 
http://www.zhongguotongcuhui.org.cn/tylt/2010ndyq/201210/t20121018_3199198.html. For a 2011 reference to her 
affiliation with Huayi Broadcasting, see (新一届省新闻“两会”理事、会员代表名单), Dongfangwang, August 22, 2011, 
at http://www.fjsen.com/zhuanti/2011-08/22/content_5648227.htm. For reference to Liu as 61985 Unit commander, 
see (关于对拟命名福建省双拥模范城（县） 、拟表彰双拥模范单位和个人进行公示的公告), Fuzhou Daily, July 2, 2013, 
at http://fjrb.fjsen.com/fjrb/html/2013-07/02/content_638796.htm?div=-1. SCOL Jie Yanzhen (揭衍珍) is deputy 
chief of VTS, which is ostensibly a division leader position. For reference to Jie as a division leader grade officer, see 
“List of Participants in Second China Cross-Strait General Art Exhibition” (第二届中国海峡两岸将军书画展出席人员
名单), China Cross-Strait General Officer Arts Association website, March 17, 2012, at 
http://www.jjshz.com/frontstage/detail/63. Shen Yongfeng (沈永峰) is the VTS deputy chief editor and a senior 
authority in the CAPCC Academic Research Department. 
 
186 For reference to a May 2013 visit of CHBC general manager Liu Linlan to Taiwan to discuss joint cooperation on 
broadcasting, see “China Huayi Broadcasting Station Visits Taiwan to Push Cross-Strait Broadcast Cooperation” (“中
国华艺广播电台”访台 推两岸广播合作), China Review News, May 12, 2013, at 
http://www.zhgpl.com/doc/1025/3/5/3/102535339.html?coluid=156&kindid=5810&docid=102535339&mdate=051
2002018. 
 
187 See (福建华信举办迎“七一”华信一家亲趣味运动会), China Huaxin website, June 30, 2012, at 
http://www.cefc.co/news.php?id=222&&te=06&&type=2012. For reference to its affiliation with the 61716 Unit, see 
http://12281420.czvv.com/. The training center is located 3 Meifeng Road (梅峰路 3 号), and is co-located with the 
61070 Unit. Lan Hansheng began with Fujian Huaxin in 2006. Lan Hansheng began with CEFC Fujian Holdings in 
2006. For reference to Lan Hansheng as CEFC deputy secretary general, and member of its executive standing 
committee, see the CEFC website at: http://www.chinaenergyfund.org/about.php?cid=10. Also see Wuping Chamber 
of Commerce website at: http://www.wpfzsh.com/bencandy.php?fid=71&id=803. The chairman of the China 
Institute of Culture is Ye Jianming. Xu Jialu serves as president. For reference to Lan Hansheng and CHBC general 
manager Ai Songru speaking at a commemoration of the Wuyuan Cultural Institute’s 15th anniversary, see (福建省五
缘文化研究会成立 15 周年纪念会暨三届四次理事会在榕隆重召开), Wuyuan News, May 19, 2012, at 
http://wywhyjh.blog.163.com/blog/static/206391060201241922259360/. Ai Songru (艾松如), who seems to use a 
pseudonym of Ai Ke (艾克), is one of three CHBC general manager. Based on published writings, Ai Songru 
specializes in psychological warfare. See, for example, Ai Songru, “Examination of Psychological Warfare in Modern 
War From the Perspective of the Kosovo Conflict” (从科索沃危机看现代战争心理战的运用), April 22, 2005, at 
http://www.defence.org.cn/article-2-18900.html or http://wenku.baidu.com/view/3f8d1fd884254b35eefd3489.html. 
Ai was formerly with the 16th Group Army (65301 Unit) Political Department. 
 
188 See Carla Freeman and Drew Thompson , China on the Edge China’s Border Provinces and Chinese Security 
(Wash DC: Policy Center for the National Interest and Johns Hopkins SAIS, 2011). 
 
189 (中国国门会晤官纪实), PLA Life, September 7, 2011, at 
http://military.people.com.cn/GB/8221/51757/44177/15613022.html. Guo Qingzhong (郭庆忠; 1916-2011) was an 
early leader of the GPD/LD Border Liaison Division. 
 
190 A work station commander appears to carry a grade of division deputy leader (副师职). In addition to a Fujian 
provincial-level station, Nanjing MR liaison work stations are located in Ningbo, Xiamen, and Fuzhou. The Ningbo 
work station commander is (郭化群). The Nanjing MR Political Department Liaison Department’s Fujian Work 
Station is the 73716 Unit. Subordinate elements are located in Shanghai, Xiamen, Fuzhou, and Quanzhou. Other 
affiliated units include the 73720 Unit. 
 
191 You Zhongmin (尤众敏) directs the Nanjing MR Liaison Department (南京军区政治部联络部). He also serves as 
JAIFC executive deputy director, and directs the Jiangsu Province Liaison Office (江苏省政府联络办). He also 
manages the Nanjing Huayi Audio and Video Company (南京华艺音像公司). Yin Xiang (尹翔) is dual-hatted as JAIFC 
secretary general, and director of the JAIFC Asia-Pacific Research Center (江苏省友联会亚太研究中心). Among 
various sources, see CAIFC Hosts Seminar in Nanjing on ‘US Pacific Strategy and China Policy’” (友联会在南京举办
“美国亚太战略与对华政策”研讨会), at http://caifc.org.cn/c2.aspx?id=434. Also see “Jiangsu International Friendly 
Contact Third Council held in Nanjing,” Jiangsu Foreign Affairs Office, August 4, 2007, at 
http://old.jsfao.gov.cn/Print.asp?NewsID=11454. Yang Yuhui (杨玉辉) is the Nanjing MR Liaison Department deputy 
director. He is a formal advisor to Tailian. For reference to Yang Yuhui and the Nanjing MR Liaison Department, see 
(摄制《江海明珠崇明岛》前后), Shanghai and Taiwan, July 16, 2013, at http://www.shanghai-

 
70 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
taiwan.org/chs/newsdetail.aspx?id=40333.  
 
192 The GAIFC Asia-Pacific Region Development Research Center (广东省亚太地区发展研究中心) most recently 
formed the South Seas National Strategy Department (海南国家战略部). For background on GAIFC, see 
http://www.gaifc.org.cn/about.asp?id=1. Wang Weidong (王维栋; or 王卫东; b. 1963) directs the Liaison Department, 
which is subordinate to the Guangzhou MR Political Department. Originally from Jiangxi’s Jiangdu, Wang Weidong 
also serves as a GAIFC Executive Deputy Director and spent his career within the Guangzhou Military Region.  GAIFC 
Deputy Director You Yaping (尤亚平; b. 1961) was listed as a Guangzhou MR Political Department office director in 
2007. Zhao Haiming (赵海明), who was a lieutenant colonel within the Guangzhou MR Political Department Liaison 
Department in the 2001 timeframe, serves as GAIFC secretary general and deputy director of the GAIFC Asia-Pacific 
Region Development Research Center. Between 1995 and 2000, Zhao was a researcher with the Guangdong Asia-
Pacific Region Social Development Institute (广东省亚太地区社会发展研究所). For reference to Wang Weidong, Zhao 
Haiming, and Asia-Pacific Region Development Research Center participation in a cross-Strait academic dialogue, , 
see “Important Cross-Strait Experts  (两岸三地重要专家深圳研讨和平发展), China Review News, December 4, 2010, 
at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/doc/docDetailCreate.jsp?coluid=118&kindid=3700&docid=101527782&page=2&mdate=1204225735. For 
reference to Wei Weidong and his association’s linkage with the Huangpu Alumni Association, see “Huangpu Alumni 
Association Hosts Visitors from Taiwan’s Political Warfare School Association” (黄埔军校同学会接待台湾政战校友会
参访团), November 19, 2009, at http://www.huangpu.org.cn/hnhd/201206/t20120612_2726723.html. For coverage 
of a cross-Strait conference on maritime territorial disputes co-hosted with CAPCC, see (两岸退役将领和专家学者研讨
共同维护中华民族领土主权和海洋权益), Renminwang, September 11, 2012, at 
http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2012/0911/c70731-18981449.html. Guangzhou MR oversees liaison work stations in 
Haikou, Shantou, Wuhan, and Shenzhen.  
 
193 A Takungpao article noted that Qi Qiaoqiao was assigned to the Guangzhou MR after her father, Xi Zhongxun, 
became Guangdong governor. In this position as a junior officer, she facilitated the repatriation of Vietnamese 
prisoners of war in 1979. She rose to become a senior foreign affairs officer within the PAP. See “Xi Zhongxun’s 
Daughter Qi Qiaoqiao: Beautiful Transformation after the Cultural Revolution Ordeal” (习仲勋之女齐桥桥：历经文革
磨难 商海华丽转身), Takungpao, October 10, 2012, at http://www.takungpao.com/people/content/2012-
10/10/content_1204442_3.htm. 
 
194GAIFC’s relationship with another organization – Southern Association for International Friendly Contact (南方国
际友好联络会) – is unknown. Senior leaders include Lei Haimin (雷海敏), who was mishu for Ye Xuanning’s brother, 
Ye Xuanping (叶选平; b. 1924), during his time as Guangdong governor (1985-1991). A deputy director of the 
Southern AIFC is Chen Xinniang (陈心念), who is also deputy director of the Guangzhou Foreign Liaison Office. Chen 
Shangfeng (陈上风) is Southern AIFC secretary general and a division chief with the Guangzhou Foreign Liaison 
Office. Among various sources, see http://nanhai.hinews.cn/thread-4830518-1-1.html. 
 
195 Fan Mingxing (范名兴), at least as of 2010, was a senior authority within the Chengdu MR Political Department 
Liaison Department, and SAIFC (四川省国际友好联络会) Research Center. See (第五届“四川藏学界新春联谊会”会议
纪要), at http://www.zangx.com/old/news/132.html. SAIFC may oversee the Sichuan International Peace and 
Development Research Center (四川国际和平与发展研究中心). SAIFC’s South and Southeast Asia Research Center (
南亚与东南亚研究中心) produces the journal South and Southeast Asia Studies (南亚与东南亚研究). 
 
196 In addition to Yang Junqiang (杨军强), Heilongjiang AIFC’s (吕占明) formerly served as Siping and Suihua 
Military Sub-District Political Department director. He is currently a member of Heilongjiang’s Taiwanese 
Compatriot Association. In addition to SCOL Bao Liangming (包良明), a previous Beijing MR Liaison Department 
director was (黄裕镜). Jin Xin (金鑫) most likely is responsible for Beijing MR liaison work. He is executive deputy 
director of BAIFC. Dai Huailiang (戴怀亮) appears to be associated with the Beijing MR Liaison Department, and 
serves as BAIFC secretary general. Deputy secretary general of BAIFC, Li Hongxue (李洪学), appears focuses on 
Taiwan issues. BAIFC deputy director Wei Xueliang (韦学良) is believed to be a PLA Navy political officer. BAIFC 
Deputy Director Wang Wei (王巍) is dual hatted as deputy director of the Beijing Garrison Political Department. At 
least one platform possibly affiliated with Beijing MR liaison work is the Beijing MZY Culture and Media Company 
(北京木子雨文化传媒有限公司). A Jinan Military Region Liaison Work Station in Yantai (济南军区烟台联络工作站) 
has also been noted. Among various sources referencing BAIFC, see “CAIFC’s Li Xiaohua Meets Guests from Russia’s 
Buryatia” (李晓华副会长会见俄罗斯布里亚特客人), CAIFC Press Release, August 6, 2012, at 
http://www.caifc.org.cn/content.aspx?id=2706. 

 
71 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
197 For authoritative reference to a Liaison Department under the PLAAF Political Department, see Luo Yichang (罗益
昌) and Zhu Changsheng (朱长生), “Lessons and Implications of Soviet Communist Party Cadre Organizational Line” 
(苏共在组织干部路线上的教训与启示), Nantong Party Building Magazine (南通党建杂志), 2008 (Vol 3), at 
http://www.ntdj.gov.cn/art/2011/1/6/art_32074_1039120.html. For a references to the existence of a PLA Navy 
Political Department Liaison Department, see “Roster of General and Navy Officers” (蒋军海军军官名册), Hefei City 
Library, at http://opac.hflib.gov.cn/lib2/book/70299?globalSearchWay=title; and “Passing of Song Gan” (宋干同志逝
世), CCP News, November 19, 2011, at http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/64093/87393/16310205.html. According to one 
unconfirmed account, a number of sons and daughters of senior PLA revolutionaries were in the liaison work field in 
the late 1970s, including Ye Xuanning (岳枫); Liao Chengzhi’s son Liao Hui (廖晖); the daughter of Wang Dongxing 
(汪东兴), Wang Dayan (汪大燕); and Geng Biao’s son Geng Zhisheng (耿志生). See “Seeing Liu Yazhou Again” (又见刘
亚洲), Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau Digest (台港澳文摘), Vol 2, No, 3, 2011, at 
http://lib.gddx.gov.cn/gdsqkx/study/tgawzsjk/articleshow.asp?articleid=2011032300110004. The author cites his 
affiliation with the PLA Navy Political Department Liaison Department at the time. 
 
198 Wang Naitian (王乃天; 1909-2006) was one of the first PLAAF enemy/liaison work officers. He eventually became 
a senior CAAC official. See (王乃天同志生平), CAAC News, December 26, 2006, at 
http://editor.caacnews.com.cn/mhb/html/2006-12/26/content_2386.htm. For reference to Liu Yazhou’s early 
assignment within the PLAAF Political Department Liaison Department, see “Former PLAAF Deputy Political 
Commissar Liu Yazhou Moves to Become NDU Political Commissar” (空军原副政委刘亚洲调任国防大学政委), China 
Daily, January 26, 2010, at http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/dfpd/2010-01/26/content_9376920.htm. More 
specifically, General Liu was assigned to the PLAAF Political Department Liaison Department 1st Division (1 处) in 
1979. See “Du Jincai, Liu Yazhou, and Six Others Promoted to General” (杜金才、刘亚洲等 6 人晋升上将军衔警衔), 
Takungpao, July 30, 2012, at http://www.takungpao.com/mainland/content/2012-07/30/content_847925_4.htm. 
General Liu Yazhou (刘亚洲; b. 1952) is a son of a prominent senior political officer within the Lanzhou Military 
Region, MG Liu Jiande (刘建德). General Liu is married to Li Xiaolin, the daughter of former President and CPPCC 
Chairman Li Xiannian. He spent a year at Stanford from May 1986. While assigned to Stanford, Gen Liu was alleged 
to have supported GPD/LD Director Ye Xuanning on a special mission to South Korea in 1986, and later to Taiwan in 
1991. He also was rumored to have been assigned to the CMC General Office (中央军委办公厅政治部) and in summer 
1988 was assigned to the CMC General Office Political Department. In 1990, he was a political commissar within a 
GSD research institute. Among other sources of unknown reliability, see “Pro-Democracy General Could Help Shape 
Xi's vision for China,” Want China Times, March 31, 2013, at http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-
cnt.aspx?cid=1601&MainCatID=16&id=20130331000064; and (邓正来：我对刘亚洲将军的评价), Boxun, July 17, 
2008 at http://boxun.com/news/gb/pubvp/2008/07/200807171134.shtml. 
 
199 For reference to Luo Yichang (罗益昌; b. 1964), see Xu Laihua (许涞华), “Psychological Warfare and Political Work 
in Air Force War Under Modern High Tech Conditions” (高技术战争空军中的心理战与思想政治工作), Studies on 
Military History (军事历史研究), April 2001, pp. 119-127. 
 
200 The Nanjing Political Academy (南京政治学院; 南政) is a corps leader-level organization, while Xian Political 
Academy (西政) appears to be a deputy corps leader entity. At least one prominent legal warfare expert is MG Yu 
Zhengshan (俞正山).  
 
201 In 2011, the Xian Political Academy Commandant was Qi Sanping (齐三平). He was assigned as director of the 
AMS Military Construction Research Department in 2012. Among various sources, see (中国组建心理战试验部队 目前
仍属探索阶段), China Aviation News, March 8, 2010, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1012/5/3/9/101253907.html?coluid=7&kindid=0&docid=101253907; and 
“MG Xu Yan: PLA Already Establishes Psychological Warfare Test and Evaluation Unit” (徐焰少将：人民解放军已经
建立心理战实验部队), Renminwang, April 2, 2010, at 
http://military.people.com.cn/GB/42969/58519/11287599.html.  The test and evaluation unit may be a company 
under the 39th Group Army’s 115th Motorized Infantry Division 345 Regiment (65539 Unit). For further background 
on PSYOPS theory, see Ma Zhong (马忠), War Without Bloodshed: Psychological Warfare Studies (兵不血刃的战
争：心理战研究) (Beijing: AMS Publishing, 1989). Ma Zhong formerly served as the director of the Xian Political 
Academy Psychological Operations Institute (西安政治学院心理战研究所). 
 
202 The latter is the Foreign Military Political Work Research Institute (外军政治性工作研究所). Hao Weixue (郝唯学) 
is the chairman of the PSYOPS school and the Military Psychology Instruction and Research Center (军事心理学教研

 
72 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
中心). See (我军第一代心理战学子振翅待飞), S&T Daily, April 20, 2004, at 
http://www.stdaily.com/oldweb/gb/stdaily/2004-04/20/content_238369.htm. For an overview of PLA PSYOPS 
theory, see Hao Weixue, (第三种视角看心理战), Guangming Daily, September 19, 2007.  Dai Weimin serves the 
Shanghai branch director.  Gong Shenping (贡沈平) has served as political commissar of the Nanjing Political 
Academy’s Shanghai Branch (南京政治学院上海分院) PC. 
 
203 Liu Zhifu (刘志富) directs the NDU Three Warfare Research Center (国防大学三战研究中心). 
 
204 “Navy Psychological Testing Center Established” (海军心理实验中心建成), PLA Daily, January 26, 2010, at 
http://www.chinanews.com/gn/news/2010/01-26/2091034.shtml. 
 
205 Hao Wenxue (郝唯学) and Jiang Jie (蒋杰), “History and Characteristics of Chinese PLA Psychological Warfare 
Theoretical Research” (中国人民解放军心理战理论研究的历史发展及特点), Military History Studies (军事历史研究), 
April 2008, p. 69, at http://www.hprc.org.cn/pdf/JLSY200804010.pdf. 
 
206 For an overview of the relevance of systems, see Kenneth Lieberthal, Governing China: From Revolution Through 
Reform (New York: Norton & Company, 2004), pp. 218-233. 
 
207 After his tenure as GPD/LD deputy director in the 1950s, MG Wang Xinggang transferred to the CMC General 
Office, establishing a precedent for selected successors. See (将军，来自没有硝烟的战场), at 
http://www.dlxww.com/xinghaiwan/content/2012-03/25/content_287340.htm. Another precedent of a GPD 
propaganda or liaison work specialist being assigned to the CMC General Office is Cheng Jianning (程建宁; b. 1932), 
who had served as GPD Political Department deputy director before assignment as CMC General Office director in the 
late 1980s. Jiang Shengsan (蒋省三; b. 1953) was dual hatted as mishu to Yang Shangkun, and GPD/LD staff officer 
between July 1985 and around 1993. Upon Yang Shangkun’s retirement, Jiang Shengsan was assigned as deputy 
director and subsequently director of the CMC General Office Comprehensive Investigation and Research Bureau 
(CIRB; 军委办公厅综合调研局). The CIRB director carries a grade of corps deputy leader (副军职), one half grade 
above a GPD or GSD bureau director. CIRB deputy directors are assigned a grade of division leader, equal to a GPD or 
GSD bureau director. GSD DCOGS, LTG Wang Guanzhong (王冠中; b. 1953), may serve as another example of the 
linkage between GPD and the CMC General Office CIRB. After six years working in the GPD Propaganda Department 
as a political warfare strategist, Wang Guanzhong was assigned as CIRB deputy director in June 1996.  In July 2000, 
he became CIRB director. In February 2001, he became deputy director of the CMC General Office. By December 
2007, he was assigned as director of the CMC General Office.  In 2012, he crossed over to GSD to serve as a Deputy 
Chief of the General Staff.  Yet another prominent career political work officer assigned to the CMC General Office 
CIRB is MG Zhang Jiajun (张家军; b. 1957). In addition to serving as CIRB director, MG Zhang headed the CMC 
General Office Executive Officer Bureau (中央军委办公厅秘书局). He currently serves as GLD Political Commissar. 
 
208 Former Xinjiang party chairman and NPC Vice Chairman Ismail Tiliwaldi (司马义·铁力瓦尔地; b. 1944) serves as 
chairman. Former GPD Deputy Director GEN (ret) Tang Tianbiao (唐天标; 1940) is first vice chairman. Former 
Nanjing MR Political Commissar GEN (ret) Lei Mingqiu (雷鸣球); b. 1942); former PLA Navy Political Commissar 
ADM (ret) Hu Hanlin (胡彦林; b. 1943); propaganda authority and former NDU Political Commissar GEN (ret) Zhao 
Keming (赵可铭; b. 1942); former GLD Political Commissar GEN (ret) Sun Dafa (孙大发; b. 1943); former PAP and 
Lanzhou MR Political Commissar GEN (ret) Yu Linxiang (喻林祥; 1945); and former Deputy Minister of Public 
Security Zhao Yongji (赵永吉; b. 1945) are other senior authorities. Previous chairmen included former NPC 
Chairman Peng Zhen (彭真; 1902-1997); former CCP International Liaison Department Director and Minister of 
Defense Geng Biao (耿飚; 1909-2000); and prominent propaganda authority He Jingzhi (贺敬之; b. 1924).  
 
209 Established in 1984, the China International Cultural Communications Center (中国国际文化传播中心) executive 
chairman is Long Yuxiang (龙宇翔; b. 1962). Honorary Vice Chairman GEN (ret) Zhang Li (张黎; b. 1943) is a 
propaganda specialist who former served as mishu to Xiao Hua (肖华; 1916—1985) in the 1984-1985 timeframe and as 
DCOGS. As an aside, Xiao Hua’s son-in-law is Li Ruogu (b. 1951), chairman of the Export-Import Bank of China. Li 
Ruogu’s father, Li Zhuoran (李卓然), was a former deputy director of GPD. 
 
210 For an overview of PLA military diplomacy, see Heidi Holz and Kenneth Allen, “Military Exchanges with Chinese 
Characteristics: The People’s Liberation Army Experience with Military Relations” in Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, 
and Andrew Scobell (eds), The PLA at Home And Abroad: Assessing The Operational Capabilities Of China’s 
Military, pp. 429-480. For a good overview of PLA military diplomacy and media, see Thomas A. Hollihan and Zhan 
Zhang, Media Diplomacy and U.S. – China Military-To-Military Cooperation (Los Angeles: Figueroa Press, 2012), at 

 
73 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
http://uscpublicdiplomacy.org/publications/perspectives/Media%20Diplomacy%20Paper5_2012.pdf. Also see 
“Interview with MND/FAO Director Qian Lihua” (专访国防部外事办公室主任钱利华), China Today, February 27, 
2011, at http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2011-02/27/content_1812282.htm. The Foreign Affairs Office is directed by Guan 
Youfei (关友飞; b. 1957). Guan Youfei formerly served as MND/FAO Comprehensive Bureau director and MND/FAO 
deputy director. He replaced Qian Lihua (钱利华). 
 
211 Ma Xiaotian replaced Xiong Guangkai as the DCGOS with the foreign affairs and intelligence portfolio in 
September 2007, including management of the formal US-China military-to-military relationship. In 2012, Ma was 
replaced by Qi Jianguo (戚建国; b. 1952). Among various sources, see James Mulvenon, “The Dawn of Heaven? A 
New Player in Sino-U.S. Mil-Mil,” China Leadership Monitor (Vol 24), March 2008, at 
http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/CLM24JM.pdf. 
 
212 The GSD Second Department political commissar is Yao Liyun (姚立云; b. 1954). Before his current assignment, 
Yao served as Second Department Political Department director and deputy political commissar of the PLA University 
of Science and Technology (解放军理工大学) in Nanjing. 
 
213 Speculative assessments of friction between political and warfighting authorities emerged when Western media 
reported a verbal altercation between DCOGS GEN Zhang Qinsheng and senior CMC authorities. The reported 
altercation may have been related to a promotion issue rather indicative of a broader political debate. For coverage of 
the incident, see Edward Wong and Jonathan Ansfield, “Party Bristles at Military’s Push for More Sway in China,” 
New York Times, August 7, 2012, at http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/08/world/asia/chinas-military-seeks-more-
sway-worrying-communist-party.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. 
 
214 DCOGS ADM Sun Jianguo (孙建国; b. 1952) appears to have replaced LTG Qi Jianguo as CIISS director in 2013. 
 
215 For an examination of Taiwan-related united front activities, see John Dotson, “Retired Taiwan Officer Exchanges 
Offer Insight into a Modern ‘United Front’,” China Brief, Vol. 11, Issue 19, October 14, 2011, at 
http://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=38525. The chairman of the CPPCC 
(中国人民政治协商会议全国委员会; 全国政协) is a member of the Politburo Standing Committee and the TALSG. 
He/she usually functions as the second senior-most party cadre providing Taiwan-related policy guidance and 
oversight.  The CPPCC chairman is assisted by as many as 12 vice chairmen, a secretary-general, issue-specific 
committees, and parallel CCPCC organizations at the provincial/municipal level. Among these, the Hong Kong, 
Macao, Taiwan, and Overseas Chinese Committee ,and possibly the Friendly Relations sub-committee, coordinates 
Taiwan-related issues. The former is dual hatted as the ARATS chairman, and is supported by as many as 15 deputies. 
One of the most noteworthy CPPCC vice-chairmen is C.H Tung, chairman of the China-U.S. Exchange Foundation 
(CUSEF). 
 
216 The UFWD deputy director with what appears to be the Taiwan portfolio is Lin Zhimin (林智敏; b. 1956), who 
replaced You Lantian (尤兰田; b. 1951) in 2012. Originally from Fujian, Lin Zhimin spent most of her career in the 
UFWD First and Sixth Bureaus. She is dual-hatted as CPPCC deputy secretary general. The specific entity within the 
UFWD responsible for Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao work is the Third Bureau (中央统战部三局), which is directed 
by Li Lu (李路; b. 1954). As a side note, former UFWD General Office Director Zhang Zhigong (张志功) served as Xi 
Jinping’s father’s mishu for 20 years. Among various sources on UFWD, see Lyman P. Van Slyke, Enemies and 
Friends: The United Front in Chinese Communist History (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1967); and Gerry 
Groot, Managing Transitions: The Chinese Communist Party, United Front Work, Corporatism and Hegemony 
(Psychology Press, 2003). For reference to GPD’s linkage with the united front system, also see David M. Lampton, 
The Making of Chinese Foreign and Security Policy in the Era of Reform (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2001), pp. 81-82. For an overview of United Front work in Hong Kong, see Holly Porteous, “Beijing's United Front 
Strategy in Hong Kong,” Commentary, Summer 1998, at http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca/pblctns/cmmntr/cm72-eng.asp.  
 
217 Provincial media reflects Huang Biaoliang as a GPD/LD Guangzhou Bureau cadre, GAIFC secretary general, and a 
staff officer in the Guangzhou City Party Committee’s division handling Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao affairs (广州
市委台港澳联络处正处调研员). A separate reference lists Huang Biaoliang as a staff officer within the Guangzhou City 
Party Committee United Front Department Liaison Division (广州市委统战部联络处调研员). Based on publicly 
available data, Huang Biaoliang is graduate of the PLA Foreign Language Academy and specializes in US economic 
issues. For reference Huang as assigned to the provincial United Front Department Liaison Office, see (第十一届“海外
杰青汇中华”交流团走访广州南沙), China Daily, September 27, 2012, at 
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/hqpl/zggc/2012-09-27/content_7126927.html. For a reference noting Huang 
Zhibiao’s association with GPD/LD, see (军情人员或者冒充军情人员任安利违法犯罪的举报), CICC Forum, November 

 
74 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
30, 2010, at http://bbs.cnfol.com/thread-5720959-1-1.html. The article outlines a controversy surrounding an alleged 
former GPD/LD officer assigned to the Guangzhou bureau. The author of the article and the credibility of the 
information presented are unknown. Some details contained in the summary appear consistent with other sources. 
 
218 CPPCC Friendly Relations Community (对外友好界) consists of a total of 41 members. Included on the list is Xu 
Lin, director of Hanban. See “12th CPPCC Member List (Friendly Relations Sub-Committee) (政协第十二届全国委员会
委员名单 [对外友好界]), China Economic Network, February 1, 2013, at 
http://www.ce.cn/xwzx/gnsz/gdxw/201302/25/t20130225_24141760.shtml. 
 
219 See Steven W. Mosher, “Confucius Institutes: Trojan Horses with Chinese Characteristics,” testimony Presented to 
the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations House Committee on Foreign Affairs, presented March 28, 2012, 
at http://archives.republicans.foreignaffairs.house.gov/112/HHRG-112-FA17-WState-MosherS-20120328.pdf. 
 
220 The function of “second line” authorities (退居二线) was spelled out in a 1983 State Council regulation (国发 142 号) 
that provides a framework for cadre who have reached mandatory retirement age to continue serving in supporting 
positions. For an example of reporting on the role of CCP-approved democratic parties, see “Survey of Taiwan-
Focused Work of Democratic Parties: Innovation, Products, and Cooperation” (各民主党派 2012 年对台工作扫描：创
新, 品牌, 合作), CCP News Release, February 22, 2013, at http://cpc.people.com.cn/n/2013/0222/c75372-
20570826.html. 
 
221 The current CAPD (中国民主建国会; 民建) chairperson is Yan Junqi (严隽琪; b. 1946). She is dual hatted as one of 
13 vice chairmen of the NPC Standing Committee. Yan’s uncle is said to be former ROC President Yen Chia-kan.  
 
222 A key China Democratic National Construction Association (CDNCA; 民进) authority who has supported GPD 
liaison work as a CAIFC advisor is Cheng Siwei (成思危; b. 1935). Cheng Siwei is a leading economic theorist and 
member of the China Soft Science Society (中国软科学研究会). Yan Jiaqi (严隽琪; b. 1946) is another prominent 
figure. Zhou Tiening (周铁农) currently chairs the KMT Revolutionary Committee (民革中央). See 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-10/09/c_131180813.htm.  
 
223 When the Japanese governor cracked down on Communist Party members on Taiwan, many fled to China.  
Taiwanese Communist Party members aligned with fugitives who escaped Taiwan after the 228 Incident, including 
Xie Xuehong (谢雪红; 1901-1970). A social activist from Changhua County, Xie and Cai Xiaoqian are said to have 
formed a militia group that took refuge in Nantou. On the eve of the resistance’s collapse, Xie fled to Hong Kong and 
was recruited into the CCP. She played an important role in China’s first Chinese People’s Consultative Conference, 
and in 1951 assigned a position within the East China Military and Administrative Committee, which included Taiwan 
within its jurisdiction. Among various sources addressing the Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League (台湾民主
自治同盟; 台盟), see Yang Shu-mei, “Leftists Make Unsuccessful Attempts to Make a Mark in Taiwan,” Want China 
Times, November 15, 2010, at http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-
cnt.aspx?id=20101115000057&cid=1501. The Cross-Strait Taiwanese Exchange Foundation was established in 2006. 
Taimeng is currently directed by Lin Wenyi (林文漪; b. 1944).  
 
224 Chinese Council for Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification (CCPPR; 中国和平统一促进会; 中国统促会) was 
established in August 1988, and oversees at least three subordinate departments responsible for comprehensive 
planning (综合部), research (研究部), and liaison (联络部). As an example of how organizations within the united 
front system are connected, Hang Yuanxiang (杭元祥) wears at least three hats: UFWD executive deputy secretary 
general, CCPPR executive deputy secretary general, and secretary general of the Huangpu Association. Song Wei (宋
为) is another CCPPR deputy secretary general.  
 
225 MG Xin Qi was a keynote speaker in the CCPPR overseas work conference held in Washington D.C. in 2011 to 
commemorate the centennial of the Xinhai revolution. See “Xinhai Centennial: Global CCPPR Conference Held in 
Washington” (辛亥百年: 全球華人促統會將在華盛頓舉行), China Review News, September 17, 2011, at 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/crn-webapp/search/allDetail.jsp?id=101837725&sw=%E5%AD%99. In 2012, 
CAPCC’s Bao Lixian accompanied ARATS and CCPPR executive board member Wang Zaixi for meetings with the 
overseas Chinese community in the US. See (王在希：维护两岸和平发展实现统一), China Review News, November 21, 
2012, at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/doc/docDetailCreate.jsp?coluid=93&kindid=7470&docid=102312248&mdate=1121211337. 
 

 
75 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
226 For background on the National Society of Taiwan Studies (NSTS; 全国台湾研究会; or 全国台研会 for short), see 
its website at http://tyh.chinataiwan.org/. Deputy directors include TALSG Office Deputy Director Sun Yafu; former 
CASS leader Zhu Jiamu (朱佳木; b. 1946); and former TAO Deputy Director Sun Xiaoyu (孙晓郁). Zhou Zhihuai (周志
怀; b. 1956) serves as secretary general. CASS Taiwan Institute Deputy Director Cao Zhihou (曹治州) is NSTS 
executive deputy secretary general. Yang Zhijian (杨志坚) and Yang Lixian (杨立宪; b. 1954) are deputy secretary 
generals. Among a long list of directors are Yu Keli (余克礼; 1952); former CASS Taiwan Institute Director Xu 
Shiquan (许世铨; b. 1942), and Xin Qi. Zheng Qingyong (郑庆勇; 1965) is NSTS Liaison Department director. For an 
example of a NSTS conference co-hosted with All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots and CASS, see 
“Symposium on Cross-Straits Relations Ends,” China Daily, July 25, 2008, at 
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2008-07/25/content_6876949.htm. For a joint symposium with SIIS, see “No 
Need for Taiwan to Work with China on Diaoyutais: Scholar, Want China Times, September 29, 2012, at 
http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20120929000035&cid=1101. Also see “Scholar Calls 
for DPP Participation in Cross-Strait Dialogues,” Xinhua, August 20, 2013, at 
http://english.cri.cn/6909/2013/08/20/2701s782971.htm. 
 
227 Huangpu Military Academy Alumni Association (黄埔军校同学会) often highlights the importance of the 
“Huangpu Spirit” in promoting cross-Strait unification. The Huangpu Association has hosted counterparts from the 
ROC New Alliance (新同盟会), which was established in 1993.  The honorary chairman of the New Alliance is retired 
ROC Political Warfare Department Director LTG Hsu Li-nong. Among various sources, see “Xin Qi: The Spirit of 
Huangpu Will Shine in the Trend toward Cross-Strait Unification” (辛旗：黄埔精神永放光芒 两岸统一大势所趋), 
Huangpu Association News Release, August 30, 2010, at 
http://www.huangpu.org.cn/zt/bagui/bagui3/bagui4/201206/t20120612_2734863.html.  
 
228 For background on the All China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots (中华全国台湾同胞联谊会; 全国台联会), see 
the organization’s website at http://www.tailian.org.cn/n1080/index.html. Wang Yifu was born in Tainan in 1950. 
Tailian also manages the “Voice of Taiwan (台声). See “The ‘Voice of Taiwan’ 2013 Second Period Programming” (‘台
声’ 2013 年第二期 目录), Tailian website, February 26, 2013, at 
http://www.tailian.org.cn/n1080/n1110/n1489/1287936.html. The responsible GPD/LD bureau-level director at the 
time was Chang Yansheng (常燕生). See “Singing to Leap Across the Taiwan Strait” (长歌越海峡), Zhongguang 
Network, November 2, 2006, at http://www.cnr.cn/zhuanti1/2005tq/zqzy/200512/t20051227_504147176.html. In 
July 2012, Tailian sponsored more than 1000 Taiwanese for a summer program in Beijing.  See 
http://english.people.com.cn/english/200006/03/eng20000603_42208.html. Tailian Director, Wang Yifu, met 
with Lien Chan during his February 2013 visit to Beijing. For reference to the Lien Chan visit, see 
http://www.tailian.org.cn/n1080/n1110/n1444/n1506/1288438.html. One other prominent Tailian authority is 
Liang Guoyang (梁国扬; b. 1951). 
 
229 For background on COFA, see its website at: http://www.cofa.org.cn/. For an example of link with GPD/LD-
affiliated platforms, see http://cn.cefc-culture.co/benyuannews/120.html. 
 
230 For reporting on the founding of the Council for Promotion of Chinese Strategic Culture (中国战略文化促进会) and 
reference to Luo Yuan, see “Jointly Promote Peaceful Development – China Strategic Culture Society Established” (共
促和平发展——中国战略文化促进会在京成立), China Taiwan Network, January 5, 2011, at 
http://www.taiwan.cn/twrwk/zxdt/201101/t20110106_1677968.htm. Also see the Council for Promotion of Chinese 
Strategic Culture website, at http://www.for-peace.org.cn/index.php. Zheng Wantong was selected as CPPCC Vice 
Chairman in 2008. Huang Jiashu (黄嘉树), a Taiwan affairs authority and professor at Renmin University, serves as 
Deputy Director, along with Yu Lian (于炼). 
 
231 Established in July 1995, the Shanghai East Asian Institute (上海东亚研究所) focuses on Taiwan, Hong Kong, 
Macao, and Japan-related issues. Its principle publication is (东亚专报). East Asian Institute deputy directors include 
Zhong Yan (钟焰), Hu Lingwei (胡凌炜),and Hu Lingshou (胡零售). Hu Weiling has been involved in Taiwan-related 
conference activities, and formerly served as assistant to the director. For background on the institute, see “Shanghai 
East Asia Institute (上海东亚研究所), Renminwang, November 29, 2001, at 
http://tw.people.com.cn/BIG5/14865/14925/859943.html. Zhang Taiyan was also known as Zhang Binglin. See 
http://www.chinareviewnews.com/crn-webapp/cbspub/docDetail.jsp?coluid=2743&docid=6701. For reference to 
Zhang’s commentary on Taiwan, see “Beijing Tied the Knot, Beijing Must Untie It,” United Daily News, June 9, 2010, 
at http://www.taiwannpfnews.org.tw/english/page.aspx?type=article&mnum=113&anum=8203. For an example, see 
(胡凌炜：台湾与大陆必然联结在一起), China Review News, December 13, 2012, at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/doc/docDetailCreate.jsp?coluid=136&kindid=4711&docid=102338221&mdate=1213005052. Also see (两岸

 
76 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
研讨会今在上海登场 将谈台湾国际空间), Radio Taiwan International, August 13, at 
http://cnnews.rti.org.tw/index_newsContent.aspx?nid=371142&id=8&id2=3. See (民革上海市委会诚邀对台专家支招
对台工作), Revolutionary KMT Committee press release, March 4, 2013, at http://www.minge.gov.cn/txt/2013-
03/04/content_5770860.htm. Other advisors and board members include Shanghai Taiwan Institute’s Yu Xintian 
(俞新天). 
 
232 For background on the CLGPIW, CCPPD, and Central External Propaganda Office (对外宣传办公室) see David 
Shambaugh, China's Propaganda System: Institutions, Processes and Efficacy,” The China Journal, Issue 57, January, 
2007, pp. 25-58; and Anna-Marie Brady, Marketing Dictatorship: Propaganda and Thought Work in Contemporary 
China (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2008), pp. 156-158. For an excellent analysis on the evolving role of 
media in China, see Alice Lyman Miller, “Analyzing Chinese Media in an Era of Sex, Money, and Power,” in Maryanne 
Kivlehan-Wise and Catherine Welch (eds), China’s New Media Milieu: Commercialization, Continuity, and Reform, 
pp. 155-169. 
 
233 Current CLGPIW director is Liu Yunshan (刘云山; b. 1947). Liu's son, Liu Lefei, heads CITIC Private Equity Funds 
Management, and has been named by Fortune Magazine as one of the25 most powerful business people in Asia. The 
younger Liu is married to Jia Liqing, daughter of former Minister of State Security, Jia Chunwang. Liu Yunshan also 
is a member of the TALSG, and is likely to retire in 2017 due to age limitations. The CCPPD is directed by Politburo 
member Liu Qibao (刘奇葆; b. 1953), who was appointed in November 2012. He formerly was Sichuan Province party 
committee secretary. Wang Weiguang (王伟光; b. 1950) replaced Chen Kuiyuan as CASS director in 2013. For further 
background, see Cheng Li, China’s Top Future Leaders to Watch: Biographical Sketches of Possible Members of the 
Post-2012 Politburo (Part 2), China Leadership Monitor, No. 38, August 6, 2012, at 
http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/CLM38CL.pdf; and “Propaganda Department Scion Liu Lefei 
Makes A Killing In Finance,” China Want Times, April 10, 2012, at http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-
cnt.aspx?id=20120410000051&cid=1601. 
 
234 The current deputy director of the CCP Propaganda Department (and concurrently director of the Central External 
Propaganda Office) is Cai Mingzhao (蔡名照; b. 1955). A former GPD propaganda cadre, Cai spent most of his career 
with Xinhua. He appears to have replaced Wang Chen (王晨; b. 1950). 
 
235 See David Shambaugh, China's Propaganda System: Institutions, Processes and Efficacy,” The China Journal, 
Issue 57, January, 2007, pp. 48-49.  Also see “Functions of the CCP Central External Propaganda Office, China 
Network, April 15, 2011, at http://www.china.com.cn/cpc/2011-04/15/content_22369321.htm. Divided into at least 
eight bureaus, the External Propaganda Office manages the development of government white papers and analyzes 
public opinion within the U.S., Taiwan, and other societies around the world. The External Propaganda Office Sixth 
Bureau is responsible for coordinating Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau-related propaganda with 
provincial/municipal party committees.  http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/64114/64139/16914678.html 
 
236 Among references to a Taiwan Propaganda Leading Small Group, see (市委宁波论坛报告会 张铭清专题报告), 
Ningbo City People’s Network, June 25, 2009, at http://www.nbrd.gov.cn/art/2009/6/25/art_5762_352473.html. 
Zhang Mingqing is listed a member. 
 
237 The MND International Communication Bureau (国防部国际传播局) deputy director is Meng Yan (孟彦). For 
reference to establishment of the GPD External Propaganda Bureau, see (亲历总政对外宣传局的组建成立), Xinhua, 
March 19, 2010, at http://news.xinhuanet.com/mil/2010-03/19/content_13204944.htm; and “Historical Process of 
the PLA News Release System” (我军新闻发布制度的历史进程), Military Reporter (军事记者), 2008 (Issue 10), at 
http://www.chinamil.com.cn/site1/jsjz/2008-10/13/content_1508209.htm. Also see Liu Zhigang, (军事对外宣传中的
军队政治传播初探), CASS Media and Broadcasting Research Institute website, September 10, 2010, at 
http://xinwen.cass.cn/news/127688.htm. For other background on military propaganda, see 
http://qkzz.net/article/81c358be-669b-4632-b9eb-86e83e9c2571.htm. And (我国军事对外宣传的跨越发展), at 
http://www.wbylw.com/gllw/qitaguanlilunwen/624.html. 
 
238 For excellent assessments of the role of academics, such as Luo Yuan and Dai Xu (戴旭; b. 1964) , in the 
propaganda system, see Andrew Chubb, “Propaganda as Policy? Explaining the PLA’s “Hawkish Faction” (Part Two), 
Jamestown China Brief, Volume: 13 Issue: 16, August 9, 2013, at 
http://www.jamestown.org/programs/chinabrief/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=41254&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid
%5D=25&cHash=57de84de0f8841ac12c795fa4fadffbc#.UgeNPpJ9BKc; Andrew Chubb, Propaganda as Policy? 
Explaining the PLA’s “Hawkish Faction” (Part One), Jamestown China Brief, Vol 13, Issue: 15, July 25, 2013, at 
http://www.jamestown.org/programs/chinabrief/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=41175&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid

 
77 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
%5D=688&no_cache=1#.UgePIJJ9BKc. 
 
239 For reference to GPD/LD issuing awards for “All-Military Advanced Taiwan Propaganda Unit (全军对台宣传先进
单位), see (充分发挥厦门特区优势积极创新国防教育工作新举措), Fujian Defense Education Network (福建国防教育
网), September 15, 2011, at http://mil.fjsen.com/zt/2011-09/15/content_5980585_4.htm. For an excellent overview 
of Taiwan propaganda work ,see Guo Hongbin (郭红斌), (试论增强对台广播宣传的有效性), PLA Daily, January 2001, 
at http://www.pladaily.com.cn/item/xwycc/200101/txt/txt_22.htm. The bureau was previously directed by MG Yang 
Dingyu (杨定宇) until his promotion as GPD Propaganda Department Deputy Director. 
 
240 State Councilor Yang Jiechi (杨洁篪; b. 1950) currently directs the FALSG Office. He replaced Dai Bingguo in this 
position. A career diplomat who focuses on American affairs, Yang was a second and first secretary for the Chinese 
Embassy in the United States in the mid 1980s. In 1983, he was promoted to counselor at the embassy. After 
returning to China, Yang served briefly in the translation and interpretation department at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. He became division director and then deputy director-general at the American and Oceania Affairs 
Department at the ministry in 1990, remaining there for three years. In 1993, he traveled back to the United States to 
assume minister and deputy chief of mission responsibilities at the Chinese Embassy. In 2001 he became ambassador 
to the United States. From 2005-2007 he served as vice minister of Foreign Affairs. He became minister in 2007, 
replacing Li Zhaoxing (李肇星; b. 1940), and promoted to State Councilor in 2012. Former TALSG Office Director 
Wang Yi replaced Yang as Minister of Foreign Affairs. Another key player in the external affairs system is Politburo 
member Wang Huning (王沪宁); b. 1955). A GSD Second Department officer, Chen Xiaogong, previously served as 
deputy director of the FALSG Office before assignment as Second Department director and subsequently Assistant to 
the Chief of the General Staff.  
241 Li Zhaoxing was ambassador to the United States in 1998 and foreign minister in 2003. He is dual hatted as 
chairman of the newly established China Public Diplomacy Association. Yang Zhenya (杨振亚) concurrently serves as 
deputy director of the China Society for People’s Friendship Studies (CSPFS; 中国国际友人研究会; 友研会). Zhang 
Deguang (张德广; b. 1941) is one of the PRC’s leading authorities on Russia, East Europe, and Central Asia. He served 
as ambassador to Russia from 2001 to 2003.  
 
242 For example, SCOL Wang Qingqian (王庆前) supposedly was assigned to the PRC Embassy in Tokyo in 2001 under 
MOFA cover.  He had been a member of CAIFC since 1980, specializing in Japan affairs.  He allegedly was arrested on 
suspicion of leaking classified information while assigned to the PRC Embassy in Tokyo. 
 
243 Among various sources, see (中国人民对外友好协会), China Culture.Org, June 28, 2004, at 
http://www.chinaculture.org/gb/cn_zggk/2004-06/28/content_55095.htm 
 
244 See Anne Marie Brady, Making the Foreign Serve China, p. 200. 
 
245For Li Xiaolin’s official biography, see http://en.cpaffc.org.cn/content/details34-627.html. 
 
246 CPAFFC (中国人民对外友好协会) was formerly directed by Chen Haosu, son of late marshal and Foreign Minster 
Chen Yi. For an overview of Chinese public diplomacy, see Dr. Nicholas J. Cull, Testimony before the US-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission, China’s Propaganda and Influence Operations, its Intelligence Activities 
that Target the United States and its Resulting Impacts on US National Security, April 30, 2009, at 
http://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/4.30.09Cull.pdf; Jaime Otero Roth, “China Discovers Public Diplomacy,” 
Elcano Royal Institute, January 6, 2007, at 
http://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/wps/portal/rielcano_eng/Print?WCM_GLOBAL_CONTEXT=/wps/wcm/connec
t/elcano/Elcano_in/Zonas_in/DT%2024-2007; and Maria Wey-Shen Siow, “Chinese Domestic Debates on Public 
Diplomacy,” East West Center Asia-Pacific Bulletin, November 15, 2012, at 
http://www.eastwestcenter.org/sites/default/files/private/apb186.pdf. 
 
247 For background on CIPRA (中国国际公共关系协会), see its website at http://www.cipra.org.cn/.  
 
248 For an interesting perspective, see You Ji and Daniel Alderman, “Changing Civil-Military Relations in China,” in 
Roy Kamphausen, David Lai, and Andrew Scobell (eds), The PLA at Home And Abroad: Assessing The Operational 
Capabilities Of China’s Military, p. 166. For a general overview of think tank organizations in China supporting 
Taiwan policy development, see Wang Ming-yi (王铭义), (大陆党政军对台智库决策角色总体扫瞄), China Times, May 

 
78 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
11, 1998, at http://forums.chinatimes.com/report/trackII/87051101.htm. In addition to CMC Chairman Xi Jinping, 
current TALSG members include Yu Zhengsheng (俞正声; b. 1945); TALSG secretary general Yang Jiechi (杨洁篪; b. 
1950), and Zhang Zhijun (张志军; b. 1953). 
 
249 In August 1991, a senior GPD/LD officer, Liu Jingyao (刘景耀), accompanied TAO Assistant to the Director Li 
Qingzhou (李庆洲) and the Nanjing MR Liaison Department Director Yang Yuhui (杨玉辉) to Xikou, the ancestral 
home of Chiang Kai-shek. After transfer to Fujian, Li Qingzhou served as mishu to Chen Mingyi (陈明义; b. 1940), He 
Guoqiang (贺国强; b. 1943), and Xi Jinping (习近平; b. 1953). He concurrently directed the Fujian Government 
Foreign Affairs Office and Fujian Association of International Friendly Contact. Among various sources, see Wang 
Chuo-chen, “Communist Chinese Military Influence on Taiwan Policy Grows” (对台决策 共军影响力增强), China 
Times, July 29, 2000, at 
http://gb.chinatimes.com/gate/gb/forums.chinatimes.com.tw/report/bargain/htm/89072910.asp; and “Record of 
Fenghua’s Opening and Reform (奉化改革开放 30 周年纪事), Fenghua City Government, 2003. Another PLA general 
officer who served within TAO is Miao Pengsheng (苗鹏生; b. 1946), who directed the Research Bureau. He was 
subsequently assigned as director of a UI GSD Second Department bureau. http://blog.sina.com.cn/liaohonglei. 
 
250 Among various sources, see “Beijing Forum Concludes, To Be Held Next Year in Hong Kong” (北京会谈闭幕 明年
香港会谈接棒), June 22, 2013, at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/touch/detail.jsp?coluid=1&kindid=0&docid=102593343; and “Conference Report, Overseas Chinese World 
Conference for Promotion of China's Peaceful Unification, Washington Assembly” (全球華僑華人促進中國和平統一華
盛頓大會大會文獻彙編), National Association for China’s Peaceful Unification, Washington DC, September 17, 2011, 
at http://nacpu.org/articles/Xin-Hai-100/2011Global-forum.html. Xin Qi accompanied TAO Deputy Director Li Yafei 
(李亚飞; b. 1955) to Washington DC in 2011. During the Beijing Forum event in June 2013, Xin Qi was a keynote 
speaker alongside TAO Deputy Director Sun Yafei and TAO Research Bureau Director Huang Wentao, along with 
CASS Taiwan Institute Director, Yu Keli (余克礼; 1952). GPD/LD officers have also appeared alongside assistant to 
the TAO director, Long Mingbiao (龙明彪; b. 1962). A graduate of the Southwest Political and Legal University (西南
政法大学), Long Mingbiao worked within the Discipline Inspection Commission up to 2007, when he was assigned to 
the TAO. Between March 1996 and and February 1997, he did a short stint in the Xiamen City Party Committee. He 
became mishuju director in 2005. 
 
251 Members have included Cao Xiaoheng (曹小衡; b. 1955), Xu Bodong (徐博东; b. 1944),  Zhang Mingqing (张铭清), 
Liu Hong (刘红), and Geng Jun (耿军). Among various sources, see (演讲人简历), Huaxia Network, August 14, 2007, 
at http://www.huaxia.com/zt/jl/07-076/580688.html. As an aside, there has been some consideration of 
subordinating the TAO under a new State Peaceful Unification Commission (国家和平统一委员会). Other 
organizations that would be merged under the new commission include the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, 
Overseas Chinese Affairs Office, State Administration for Religious Affairs, and State Ethnic Affairs Commission. 
 
252 For an early assessment of the organization, see “The International Liaison Department of the Chinese Communist 
Party,” POLO XLIV, December 1971, CIA Directorate of Intelligence Report (declas in May 2007).“Eight Regional ILD 
Bureau Directors Discuss Development and Results of 2011 Party External Affairs Work” (中联部八位地区局局长谈
2011 年党的对外工作的发展与成就), CCP Press Release, January 29, 2012, at 
http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/140138/16957268.html. For an overview of the CCP International Department, 
see its website at: http://www.idcpc.org.cn/index.htm. The CCP International Department director is Wang Jiarui (王
家瑞; b. 1949). See http://www.idcpc.org.cn/ziliao/tbtj/1301.htm. Former NPC Vice Chairman Zhou Tienong is 
CAFIU director, as well as head of the KMT Revolutionary Committee. 
 
253 Yang Jiechi, “Innovations in China 's Diplomatic Theory and Practice Under New Conditions,” Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs website, August 16, 2013, at http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zxxx/t1066869.shtml. 
254 Meng Jianzhu (孟建柱; b. 1947) currently serves as secretary of the Central Political Legal Committee. A graduate 
of the Shanghai Mechanical Engineering Institute., Meng has roots in Shanghai City party structure and rose to serve 
as a deputy mishuzhang in the Shanghai government (1992-93), then vice-mayor and deputy secretary of the 
municipal party committee. In 2007, he was appointed as Minister of Public Security. In 2008, he was promoted to 
State Councilor rank. Meng Jiangzhu is likely to retire in 2017 due to age limitations. Guo Shengkun (郭声琨; b. 1954) 
replaced Meng as Minister of Public Security in 2012. Wang Yongqing (汪永清; b. 1959) serves as Central Political 
Legal Committee secretary general. 
 
255 Dual hatted as Zhou Enlai’s mishu, Yang Yindong (杨荫东; 1922-2005) had emerged from the Social Work system. 
After the office was reorganized in 1979 under Deng Xiaoping, Yang Yindong became office deputy director, then 

 
79 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
reappointed director in 1982. He retired in 1985, and performed second line cadre mission as deputy director and 
secretary general of the Huangpu Alumni Association. In November 1969, the CID was placed under military control. 
Luo Qingchang (罗青长), father of outspoken AMS authority Luo Yuan, served as a Taiwan Work Office senior 
authority and CID director from 1975 until formation of the MSS in 1983. 
 
256 Dual hatted as Zhou Enlai’s mishu and a veteran member of the Social Work system, Yang Yindong (杨荫东; 1922-
2005), directed the Taiwan Work Office, which was housed within Central Investigation Department spaces.  Other 
prominent players included Li Kenong (李克农), Public Security Director Luo Ruiqing (罗瑞卿), GPD’s Gan Siqi (甘泗
奇), propaganda and United Front authority Liao Chengzhi (廖承志; 1908-1983), Xu Bing (徐冰), Zhang Hanfu (章汉
夫, also known as 谢启泰), Zhang Banshi (章泮石), and Cao Juren (曹聚仁). Second-level authorities included UFWD 
Secretary General (童小鹏), CID Deputy Director Luo Qingchang (罗青长), and GPD’s Yang Side, and Security Deputy 
Minister (凌元), Propaganda Department Deputy Director (姚榛), and Overseas Chinese Committee authority (吴济
生). (王宏儒) and Yang Yindong (杨荫东) also played important roles. 
 
257 Peter Mattis, “The Analytic Challenge of Understanding Chinese Intelligence Services,” Studies in Intelligence, Vol. 
56, No. 3, September 2012, at https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-
studies/studies/vol.-56-no.-3/pdfs/Mattis-Understanding%20Chinese%20Intel.pdf. 
 
258 For reference to an MSS propaganda bureau (国家安全部宣传局), see (云南戴托普治疗社区在中国的实践), 
Renminwang, August 3, 2004, at http://www.people.com.cn/GB/guandian/8213/8309/28296/2684284.html. 
 
259 Established in 1984, former CICEC (中国国际文化交流中心) executive vice chairman, Li Liyun (林丽韫; b. 1933), 
was born in Taiwan. Wang Zhaoguo was a former executive director. MSS Director Geng Huichang (耿惠昌) formerly 
served as the center’s executive vice chairman from 1990 to 1993 (he concurrently served with CICIR). Ding Kuisong 
(丁奎淞) is a former CICIR expert on the U.S. and now serves as CICEC secretary general.. Another prominent figure 
is Tao Dawei (陶大为; b. 1949). 
 
260 For a good historical overview of China’s early reaction to Dulles’ peaceful evolution concept, see Qiang Zhai, “1959: 
Preventing Peaceful Evolution,” China Heritage Quarterly, June 2009 (No. 18), at 
http://www.chinaheritagequarterly.org/features.php?searchterm=018_1959preventingpeace.inc&issue=018. 
 
261 See “Stressing the Establishment of a Strong Socialist Cultural Country” (强调建设社会主义文化强国), Qiushi, 
January 1, 2012, at http://www.chinanews.com/gn/2012/01-01/3576548.shtml; Edward Wong, “China’s President 
Lashes Out at Western Culture,” New York Times, January 3, 2012, at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/04/world/asia/chinas-president-pushes-back-against-western-
culture.html?_r=0. 
 
262 See Wang Yiwei, “'China Model' Breaking Hegemony of Western Universal Values,” Renmin Ribao, January 13, 
2013, at http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/102774/8092993.html. 
 
263 Christopher Ford, “If China Ruled: A Thought Experiment,” New Paradigms Forum, August 16, 2013, at 
http://www.newparadigmsforum.com/NPFtestsite/?p=1731. 
 
264 Among various references to the ROC’s political status, see Richard C. Bush III, “The Significance of the Republic 
of China for Cross-Strait Relations,” Brookings Institution, speech at Academia Historica in Taipei on January 24, 
2013, at http://www.brookings.edu/research/speeches/2013/01/24-republic-of-china-bush; Chu Shulong, 
“Communication for Better Understanding and Improvement of Cross-Taiwan Strait Relations,” Brookings Northeast 
Asia Commentary, June 2011, at http://www.brookings.edu/research/articles/2011/06/cross-strait-shulong; 
Hongdah Chiu, “The International Legal Status of the Republic of China,” University of Maryland School of Law 
Occasional Paper in Contemporary Asian Studies, No 1, 1990, at 
http://digitalcommons.law.umaryland.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1095&context=mscas; and John R. Bolton, 
“Should the U.S. Grant Diplomatic Recognition to Taiwan?,” American Enterprise Institute Insight on the News, 
February 7, 2000, at http://www.aei.org/article/foreign-and-defense-policy/regional/asia/should-the-us-grant-
diplomatic-recognition-to-taiwan/. For counterpoints, see “Taiwan Independence and Independent Taiwan” (“台独”
与“独台”), Xinhua, September 24, 2003, at http://www.chinamil.com.cn/item/taiwan/mcjd/54.htm; “Chinese Major 
General Causes Stir with ‘Peaceful Separation’ Criticism” [我少将批“和平分裂”引震动), Global Times, November 23, 
2009, at http://www.globalview.cn/ReadNews.asp?NewsID=19760.; and “Ma Ying-jeou’s ‘Three Nos’ is an Ostrich 
Policy” [马英九的“三不”是鸵鸟政策), China Review News, September 15, 2011, at 
http://gb.chinareviewnews.com/doc/1018/3/6/3/101836363.html?coluid=123&kindid=0&docid=101836363. For a 

 
80 
| Chinese Peoples’ Liberation Army Political Warfare | 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
Taiwan-based perspective on CCP positions, also see Lu I-Ming, “The Aggression in China’s Goodwill,” Taipei Times, 
December 1, 2009, at http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/editorials/archives/2009/12/01/2003459841 
 
265In addition to associations that stress cultural and civilizational commonalities, relatively liberal organizations such 
as the Boyuan Foundation promote concepts of modernity in China’s development. Established in Hong Kong in 2007, 
Boyuan Council Chairman Qin Xiao’s sister is alleged to be married to the son of Chen Yi. Other key players include 
He Di (何迪), son of reformist former agricultural minister, and Chen Xiaolu (陈小鲁; b. 1946), son of Chen Yi. Chen 
Xiaolu is alleged to have sided with other prominent reformists, such as Hu Yaobang’s son Hu Deping (胡德平) and 
Ye Xuanning, in calling for the removal of Bo Xilai and reappraisal of the  1989 Tiananmen massacre. Other reformers 
are said to include Lu De (陆德; 1942), son of Lu Dingyi (陆定一; 1906-1996); and Ma Xiaoli (马晓力), daughter of Xi 
Zhongxun political ally, Ma Wenrui (马文瑞; 1912-2004). See, for example, David Kelly, “Chinese Political Transition: 
Split in the Princeling Camp?,” East Asia Forum, March 21st, 2011, at 
http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2011/03/21/chinese-political-transition-split-in-the-princeling-camp/; John Garnaut, 
“Elites Fight Secret Battle for China's Soul,” Sydney Morning Herald, November 12, 2012, at 
http://www.smh.com.au/world/china-politics/elites-fight-secret-battle-for-chinas-soul-20121111-296a1.html; and 
Joseph Kahn, “Among China's Elite, Talk of 'Democracy',” New York Times, April 19, 2007, at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/19/world/asia/19iht-china.5.5364015.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. 
 
266 See “Xu Jialu: Generals on Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait Are Chinese Military” (许嘉璐：两岸的将军都是中国军
人), China Review News, May 28, 2010, at http://www.zhgpl.com/crn-
webapp/doc/docDetailCreate.jsp?coluid=98&kindid=2990&docid=101336252. 
 
267 (从台湾政治生态变化浅论对台传播), February 2010, at 
http://www.qnjz.com/xinwenshijian/201003/t20100310_5431625.htm. For a PLA analysis of Taiwan’s capacity for 
psychological warfare, see “台军心理战透视及对策性思考,” at 
http://www.china1net.com/cinPsychology/XinLiBaiKe/detail.asp?ID=1701. Also see (中国心理战部队用声光电技术模
拟逼真战场环境), China Aviation News, March 9, 2010, at http://mil.sohu.com/20100308/n270647329.shtml. 
 
268 See Undermining Democracy: Strategies and Methods Of 21st Century Authoritarians, Freedom House, 2009, p. 9, 
at http://www.freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/UnderminingDemocracy_OverviewEssay.pdf. 
 
269 Max Boot and Michael Doran, “Political Warfare,” Council on Foreign Relations Policy Innovation Memorandum 
No. 33, June 2013, at http://www.cfr.org/wars-and-warfare/political-warfare/p30894; and Daniel Calingaert, 
“Exporting Repression,” Freedom At Issue, March 26, 2013, at http://www.freedomhouse.org/blog/exporting-
repression. 