Australia and the growing 
reach of China’s military 
THOMAS SHUGART 
AUGUST 2021 
ANALYSIS  

AUSTRALIA AND THE GROWING REACH OF CHINA’S MILITARY 
ANALYSIS 
The Lowy Institute is an independent policy think tank. Its mandate ranges 
across all the dimensions of international policy debate in Australia — 
economic, political and strategic — and it is not limited to a particular 
geographic region. Its two core tasks are to: 
• produce distinctive research and fresh policy options for Australia ’s
i
nternational policy and to contribute to the wider international debate
• promote discussion of Australia ’s role in the world by providing an
accessible and high -quality forum for discussion of Australian
international relations through debates, seminars, lectures, dialogues
and conferences.
Lowy Institute Analyses are short papers analysing recent international 
trends and events and their policy implications.  
The views expressed in this paper are entirely the authors’ own and not 
those of the Lowy Institute. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
ANALYSIS 1 
KEY FINDINGS  
Beijing’s maritime and aerospace capabilities will have serious 
implications in the event of an Indo-Pacific power play. 
• China’s recent military development constitutes the greatest  
expansion of maritime and aerospace power in generations and 
is most obviously seen in its expanding lo ng-range missile  
force, bomber force, and modernising blue-water navy.
• While Australia’s defence interests and territorial integrity are 
largely unthreatened for now, a future Indo-P acific dominated 
by China would present a grave p ossibility of military 
coercion by the Chinese People’s Liberation Army.
• The prospect of Chinese military action against Australia  
remains remote. But China has the military and industrial  
potential to field a long-r ange power projection capacity that 
would dwarf anything Japan threatened Australia with 
during the Second World War.

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
2 ANALYSIS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
As the international scope of China’s economic interests has expanded 
over time, China’s strategic horizons have broadened correspondingly, 
and so have its military capabilities. China is engaged in the largest and 
most rapid expansion of maritime and aerospace power in generations. 
Based on its scope, scale, and the specific capabi lities being 
developed, this buildup appears to be designed to, first, threaten the 
United States with ejection from the western Pacific, and then to 
achieve dominance in the Indo-Pacific. 
Assuming ongoing US involvement and support, the People ’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) is unlikely to be able to seriously threaten the 
environment in Australia ’s immediate region, nor Australia ’s 
sovereignty, in the immediate future. Absent assistance from allies and 
partners, China already possesses the capability to strike Au stralia 
from existing bases with bomber aircraft and long- range missiles. The 
expected introduction of additional PLA air and naval capabilities over 
time will worsen this asymmetry. 
The prospect of Chinese military action against Australia remains 
remote. But defence policy operates in the realm of low -probability, 
high-consequence events. And the sheer ability of the PLA to take such 
extreme steps places pressure on decision -makers whose actions are 
weighted with the fear that force might be used against them. 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 3 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Four thousand kilometres —  the rough distance between Australia and 
the nearest point on mainland China — sounds like a long way, and until 
fairly recently it was. As a result of the wide moat of the Pacific Ocean, 
the PLA has historically been something that most Australians could 
safely ignore. Protected by distan ce and by its alliance with the 
greatest naval power in history, Australia ’s vital interests or territorial 
integrity have never been threatened by the PLA. But that situation is 
changing. The PLA is rapidly growing from a local military force to a 
rising global power. In fact, the PLA is on track to gain the ability to 
threaten Australia ’
s access to international markets and energy 
sources and thus obtain direct coercive power over Australia ’s 
economic wellbeing. 
The PLA is also developing the military cap ability to put at risk 
Australia’s territorial integrity. Not since the Second World War has any 
great power, other than the United States, had the capability to project 
significant military force against the Australian landmass. Of course, 
the Soviet Unio n could have, in extremis, landed nuclear -tipped 
intercontinental missiles on Australian territory. But Soviet 
conventional capability was never so far -reaching; even at the Soviet 
Union’s peak as a military power, it lacked the capability to hit Australia 
with more than a handful of cruise missiles fired from long -range 
aircraft or submarines.  
 So, when Australia now thinks about how to defend its territory, it 
confronts a qualitatively different problem to the Cold War, when 
Australia knew the Soviet Union would need years, decades even, to 
build the capability to threaten Australia. The PLA already has more 
non-nuclear long-range strike capability with the range to hit Australia 
than the Soviet Union ever did. This paper examines that capability and 
looks at its likely further expansion.  
 Why does this matter, since China is not Australia’s enemy? This paper 
makes no claims about specific Chinese intent against Australia. But 
China’s intent is too unpredictable and changeable to serve as a basis 
for defence planning. Australia must plan on the basis of capability. Will 
China seek to become the dominant military power in Asia, pushing the 
United States out of the region? Again, this paper draws no conclusion 
on this critical question, other than to assu me that it is a reasonable 
possibility, and that Australia ought to think about how to defend itself 
in those circumstances. 
Not since the Second 
World War has any 
great power, other 
than the United 
States, had the 
capability to project 
significant military 
force against the 
Australian landmass. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
4 ANALYSIS 
 
 This paper will also not look at some of the more exotic and innovative 
ways China might project national power against Australia,  whether 
that is with nuclear weapons or cyber power or para -military maritime 
forces, which are so active in the South China Sea. The sole intent is to 
bring clarity to the central problem faced by Australian governments 
and planners: what is China’s ability to threaten Australia militarily, and 
how is that capability likely to grow? 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 5 
 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF C HINESE 
MILITARY POWER  
The intertwining nature of China’s economic opening 
and strategic development 
Over the last several decades, the world has observed the meteoric rise 
of Chinese economic power, following the ‘opening up’ of its economy 
in the late 1970s. While the economic empowerment and engagement 
of China has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, and 
benefited consumers of Chinese -produced goods worldwide, it has 
also led to historic improvements i n Chinese military, and especially 
naval, power. This process has not been simply a matter of China having 
additional funds available for military purchases, and then spending 
them accordingly. Rather, it has been a self-reinforcing cycle where the 
growing array of Chinese overseas economic interests and investments 
has driven increased Chinese perceptions of insecurity —  on top of 
historical grievances and long -simmering tensions related to 
sovereignty and territorial issues in places such as Taiwan, the Senkaku 
Islands, and the South China Sea. This feeling of insecurity is most 
clearly illustrated in what was described by former Chinese president 
H u  J i n t a o  i n  2 0 0 3  a s  C h i n a’s “Malacca dilemma”,  a recognition that 
China’s energy supplies could be interdicted by hostile foreign nations 
in strategic locations such as the Strait of Malacca. Prior to China ’s 
industrial development, no such dilemma existed. But as China ’s 
economy continues to grow and become ever more dependent on 
access to overseas resources and markets, this feeling of insecurity, as 
well as the resulting appetite for the military means to reduce it, 
continues to grow.  
Before this process of economic growth and military modernisation 
began, the PLA had essentially no ability to directly harm Au stralia’s 
vital national interests or territorial integrity. While the PLA possessed 
one of the world ’s largest ground forces, it had little ability to project 
power outside the country ’s borders. At sea, early PLA Navy (PLAN) 
doctrine was focused on coast al defense,
1 with no real ability to 
interdict Australia’s sea lines of communication (SLOCs). The PLA Air 
Force (PLAAF) had no forward bases, no air -refuelling capability, and 
very limited standoff missile capability. China ’s land -based missile 
forces —  known today as the PLA Rocket Force (PLARF) —  consisted 
of small numbers of long -range nuclear -armed missiles, as well as 
conventional ballistic missiles too inaccurate to hit anything but cities.  
Before this process of 
economic growth 
and military 
modernisation 
began, the PLA had 
essentially no ability 
to directly harm 
Australia’s vital 
national interests or 
territorial integrity. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
6 ANALYSIS 
 
 
As the international scope of China’s economic interests has expanded, 
China’s strategic horizons have broadened correspondingly. Following 
China’s economic opening, the mid-1980s saw the first transformation 
of the PRC ’s naval strategy under Admiral Liu Huaqing, from its 
traditional coastal defence mission to o ne of “offshore defence ” of 
China’s near seas —  that is, out to the First Island Chain, which runs 
from Malaysia up through Indonesia, the Philippines, and Japan. 2 
China’s leaders established a timeline with three broader goals for the 
PLAN: by 2000, developing forces sufficient to exert control over the 
sea regions within the First Island Chain; by 2020, extending control 
out to the Second Island Chain, running from Papua New Gu inea up 
through the Mariana Islands to northern Japan; and by 2050, to 
develop a truly global navy.3  
On 23 April this year, Chinese President Xi Jinping showed off the PLA Navy's 
production capacity by commissioning at a single ceremony the Hainan amphibious 
assault ship, the Changzheng-18 nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine, and 
the Dalian destroyer. Image: Li Gang/Xinhua via Getty Images. 
In 2004, President Hu provided a further update to the PLA’s guidance 
with a declaration of “New Historic Missions” that broadened the PLA’s 
goals to encompass “far seas defence”,  covering seas past the First 
Island Chain and out into the open Pacific Ocean and beyond. The 
PRC’s 2015 Defence White Paper  explicitly included defence of 
overseas interests and strategic SLOCs in its goals, to be accomplished 
by the added mission of “open seas protection”,  signalling a need to be 
able to project maritime power wherever China ’s interests lie.
4 The 
2019 Defence White Paper continued this theme, declaring a need to 
develop “far seas forces ”, overseas basing facil ities (a previously -
disavowed practice for China), and enhanced “capabilities in 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 7 
 
accomplishing diversified military tasks ”.5 As outgoing PLAN chief, 
A d m i r a l  W u  S h e n g l i  s t a t e d  u p o n  h i s  d e p a r t u r e  f r o m  o f f i c e  i n  2 0 1 7 ,  
“wherever the scope of the nation’s interests extends, that is where the 
perimeter of our combat development will reach”.5F
6 
China’s desire to protect its overseas interests and defend its SLOCs 
might be regarded as anodyne; after all, such an objective on the part 
of other nations would raise little alarm. But this is largely because, in  
almost all cases, those nations lack the ability to defend their SLOCs 
on a global basis. China appears to have the motivation, maritime 
industrial might, and resolve to give its words an entirely different 
meaning: a stated strategy that, if actualised, would take the form of 
military —  and especially maritime —  capability of a scale that many 
Western observers are yet to fully comprehend. 
 In terms of the facilities necessary to underwrite expanding Chinese 
power projection and sea control across the Ind o-Pacific, we can 
already see that China has been engaged in a massive campaign to 
build air and maritime facilities spanning the region, mostly under the 
banner of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Ostensibly an effort 
focused on economic development, many of its resulting projects fall in 
highly strategically useful places, and are often of an un -economic 
nature (see the huge port facility and nearby airfield 
built a t 
Hambantota, Sri Lanka;7 or the under-utilised8 but still expanding port 
facility at Gwadar, Pakistan 9). One should consider also China ’s now 
well-publicised and explicit policy of “military–civil fusion ”, wherein 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are required by Chinese law to “provide 
necessary support and assistance to national security bodies, public 
security bodies, and relevant military bodies ”.10 This concept brings 
into a new light construction in locations such as Cambodia’s Ream 
Beach,11 as well as Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island,12 in the strategic 
approaches to the Antipodes.  
As for China’s claims of the peaceful and civilian nature of facilities it is 
building overseas, one should keep in mind President Xi Jinping ’s 
personal pledge, delivered directly to President Barack Obama in  the 
White House Rose Garden, that China would not militarise the South 
China Sea. That same South China Sea is now dominated by 
huge 
artificial islands 12F
13 that bristle with Chinese missiles, and which 
constitute just the first of what it likely to be a series of strong points 
positioned to help establish Chinese control over its critical SLOCs. 
As outgoing PLAN 
chief, Admiral Wu 
Shengli stated upon 
his departure from 
office in 2017, 
“wherever the scope 
of the nation
’s 
interests extends, 
that is where the 
perimeter of our 
combat development 
will reach”. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
8 ANALYSIS 
 
Manifestations of the development of Chinese military 
power 
Some observers assert that China’s growing military power is a “banal 
reality” intended to “defend against perceived threats in its offshore 
waters, as any country would do”.14 But were China building a military 
truly focused on largely defensive objectives, one would expect to see 
an emphasis on smaller escort ships, coastal defence missiles, fighter 
aircraft, and the like. Instead, China has engaged in the lar gest and 
most rapid expansion of maritime and aerospace power in generations. 
Based on its scope, scale, and specific capabilities, this buildup 
appears designed foremost to threaten the United States with ejection 
from the western Pacific, and thereafter to achieve domination in the 
Indo-Pacific. 
Some of the most obvious manifestations that China ’s military 
development is not defensive in nature can be seen in three specific 
areas: the deployment by the PLARF of huge numbers of long -range 
conventional ballistic missiles; a major expansion of the capabilities of 
China’
s long-range bomber force; and the explosive growth of China’s 
blue-water navy. 
CHINA’S BALLISTIC MISSILE FORCE 
Probably the most well -known element of this buildup is the huge 
arsenal of highl y accurate conventionally -armed ballistic missiles 
fielded by the PLARF. Already by far the world ’s largest, this force 
continues to grow at a rate that only makes sense for the purpose of 
severely threatening US and allied capabilities in the western Paci fic. 
This is most apparent in China ’s force of DF -26 intermediate-range 
ballistic missiles (IRBMs) —  arguably one of the crown jewels of the 
Chinese military.  
The US government’s 2020 Military and Security Developments Involving 
the People’s Republic of China publication reported an apparent more -
than-doubling in a single year of China’ s inventory of  DF-26 IRBM 
launchers.15 This growth is a continuation of previous trends: the 2018 
report had listed “16–30” launchers, then 80 in the 2019 report,16 and 
now 200 in the 2020 report. In terms of available missile inventory for 
those launchers, the report only lists “200+” as the estimated number. 
We know from Chinese television footage  that DF -26 units practice 
reloading missiles routinely, and that the missiles have different 
warhead types that are swappable. 17 Thus, if  each of the 200 -odd 
launchers had only one reload missile available (and there may well be 
more than that), this would mean an IRBM force of more than 400 
China has engaged 
in the largest and 
most rapid expansion 
of maritime and 
aerospace power in 
generations. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 9 
 
missiles, nearly all configurable to anti-ship or land-attack missions, in 
addition to the PLARF ’s h undreds of increasingly capable  ground-
launched cruise missiles.18 
A 
A 2020 US government report on China's military and security developments states 
that Beijing appears to have more than doubled in a single year its inventory of DF-
26 intermediate -range ballistic missile launchers. In 2015,  China showed off its 
weaponry at a military parade to commemorate the end of the Second World War. 
Image: The Asahi Shimbun via Getty Images. 
Going from dozens of medium -range missiles to perhaps hundreds of 
much longer-range ones will drive changes to the balance of air and 
maritime power in the western Pacific on a number of different levels — 
and with the DF-26's long range, in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf, 
too (see Figure 1). 
First, the number of available anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) could 
broaden the PLARF's anti-ship mission from what has been thought of 
as a ‘carrier-killer’ role to a more generic ‘ship-killer’ mission, for use not 
just against the United States, but potentially Australia’s surface ships 
as well. China itself describes the DF-26 as capable against large and 
medium-size ships.19 Without doubt, in a war at sea the PLA, if it had 
the inventory to do so, would be perfectly happy to trade a missile (or 
several), costing perhaps i n  t h e  o r d e r  o f  U S $ 2 0  m i l l i o n each,
20 for a 
destroyer that would cost billions to replace.  
 
 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
10 ANALYSIS 
 
 
Figure 1: A move by China's PLA from medium -range to long -range missiles will change the reach and balance of air and 
maritime power in the western Pacific. 
Another way in which a DF-26-equipped PLARF could change things 
would be through the specific additional areas that it could strike (see 
Figure 1). In the Philippine Sea, areas of relative sanctuary beyond the 
range of the older and shorter -range DF -21 medium -range ballistic 
missile (MRBM) lie well within range of the DF-26. US and allied defence 
thinkers previously posited the ability to operate forces reasonably 
safely outside the First Island Chain as a means to enable episodi c 
operations within that chain, but the risk of such operations is now 
considerably higher.21  
While some commentators have expressed incredulity  that China ’s 
IRBM force could have grown so quickly,22 missile launchers of this size 
are distinct physical objects that can be counted from space, so US 
intelligence community assessments are much more than j ust 
inference or guesswork. And while perhaps these IRBM launchers are 
not fully integrated into effective combat units yet, that is just a matter 
of time. Other observers may have doubted that China's ASBMs really 
have the ability to strike moving targets at sea, but the commander of 
US forces in the Indo -Pacific recently confirmed
 that China’s missiles 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 11 
 
did, in fact, strike moving ship targets during a recent exercise. 23 
Likewise, for the second year in a row, China has launched ASBMs into 
the South China Sea as part of an open ocean exercise for all to see.24 
Of note, China appears to be building a major ballistic missile base on 
Hainan Island, bordering the South China Sea.25 Given that China could 
already completely overwhelm any of its regional competitors’ military 
forces with the rest of the PLA’s forces, it seems likely that this ballistic 
missile base is being built to threat en US aircraft carriers operating in 
that region in support of its allies and partners. 
The threat is by no means restricted to ships. In 2017, a colleague and I 
at the Center for a New American Security estimated that a pre-emptive 
Chinese missile strike on US bases in Asia could crater every runway 
and runway-length taxiway at every major US air base in Japan, and 
destroy more than 200 aircraft on the ground. 26 We also estimated 
that, in addition to shorter -range missiles, an inventory of 
approximately 60 DF-21 MRBMs would be necessary to conduct such 
a strike.27 Considering the National Air and Space Intelligence Center’s 
recent estimate  that China now possesses “ approximately 350” 
medium and intermediate-range ballistic missile launchers, the threat 
appears to have become graver than we estimated at that time.28  
To be sure, the PLA’s missile forces are not invincible or unstoppable. 
While the details are likely to remain classified, the United States is 
surely working to develop “left of launch” measures to dazzle, decoy, or 
destroy China ’s reconnaissance satellites, as well as to jam their 
missiles’ seekers if they do manage to launch. One can also imagine 
robust efforts to disrupt, whether via kinetic means or otherwise, the 
links and nodes in China’s command and control networks that would 
be necessary to transmit targeting information from its sensor 
networks to its missile units. China ’s other reconnaissance platforms, 
whether in the air, on or under the sea, or on land, would also be prime 
targets for US and allied strike capabilities. The combination of these 
efforts would mitigate, hopefully to a significant degree, the threat of 
China’s long-range missiles. 
While China’s missile force does not currently appear to po ssess the 
range to threaten Australian bases directly from the Chinese mainland, 
if China were to deploy its IRBMs from its South China Sea island bases, 
that might no longer be true. Additionally, with the ongoing 
development of future weapon systems —  such as hypersonic glide 
vehicles or the potential development of precise conventional 
intercontinental-range missiles —  there is no clear obstacle to China 
developing missiles that could strike Australia from its mainland. 
While China’s missile 
force does not 
currently appear to 
possess the range to 
threaten Australian 
bases directly from 
the Chinese 
mainland, if China 
were to deploy its 
IRBMs from its South 
China Sea island 
bases, that might no 
longer be true. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
12 ANALYSIS 
 
Certainly, the clear trend over ti me has been China ’s development of 
precise missiles with ever-greater range, with no clear endpoint in sight. 
CHINA’S LONG-RANGE BOMBER FORCE 
In addition to its missile force, in recent years China has dramatically 
increased the capability of its fleet of long-range strike aircraft. China 
has the world’s only operating bomber production line, which has been 
producing brand-new, long-range aircraft seemingly purpose-built29 to 
strike US and allied bases, and to overwhelm US and allied carrier strike 
groups on the high seas.29F
30 
Before the last decade, China ’s bomber force had fairly limited 
capabilities. The Xi’an Aircraft Company ’s H -6, a dated copy of the 
Soviet-era Tupolev Tu-16, only carried a small number of rudimentary 
missiles and could deliver them to a limited range. Thi s began to 
change in 2009 with the introduction of the H-6K, a major redesign and 
update of the basic airframe. Equipped with completely new engines 
and avionics, the H -6K enjoys a much longer combat radius (about 
3500 kilometres
) and is capable of carrying six missiles compared to 
two in previous versions.31 
 
The Xian H-6K strategic bomber enjoys a much longer combat radius than its 
predecessor and is capable of carrying six missiles compared t o two in previous 
versions. Image: Wikimedia commons. 
Incorporating the improvements provided by the PLAAF ’s H -6K, the 
PLAN has since gained its own maritime strike -focused version of the 
aircraft — the H-6J. First seen in 2018, the H-6J is capable of carrying 
six YJ-12 long-range supersonic anti -ship cruise missiles. 32 More 
recently, China revealed the development of a new model, the H -6N, 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 13 
 
which is capable of aerial refuelling and appears to carry a single air -
launched ballistic missile with what appears to be a hypersonic glide 
vehicle.33  
Figure 1 shows such a progression of capability relative to the 
Australian continent, with China ’s older H -6H model unable to reach 
Australian targets at all; today’s H-6K able to reach northwest Australia 
if dispatched from China’s bases in the South China Sea; and eventually 
China’s air-refuellable H-6N able to strike anywhere in Australia from 
bases in mainland China. While we are yet to see military aircraft 
permanently based at China’s artificial island bases, the 
facilities built 
on them —  long runways, large aircraft hangars, and acres of hardened 
fuel tanks 34 —  appear well -suited to support operations by larger 
aircraft such as China’s bomber fleet. 
It is important to note that China is not merely replacing older bombers 
with improved ones; it appears to be growing the size of the force as 
well. Prior to the introduction of the H -6K, most estimates were that 
China’s H -6  i n v e n t o r y  w a s  i n  t h e  mid-to-low 100s. 35 In order to 
determine the approximate size of China ’s bomber force over the last 
several years, the author conducted two surveys of available 
commercial satellite imagery, using ope n-source lists of Chinese 
bomber bases. These counts, which did not include any aircraft in flight, 
in hangars, deployed to secondary airfields, or otherwise missing from 
imagery, produced results of just over 200 aircraft in 2018, and more 
than 230 in 2020.  
CHINA AS A MARITIME WORLD POWER 
In recent decades, China has grown to become the world’s premier sea 
power by most measures. China already holds first place in the size of 
its fishing, merchant shipping, and maritime law enforcement fleets. 36 
China’s shipbuilding industry dwarfs that of the United States, building 
38 million tons of shipping in 2020 compared to just over 70 000 tons 
from American yards.37 The same is true in maritime law enforcement, 
with China building coast guard cutters and “maritime safety” vessels 
weighing over 10 000 tons  —  larger even than the latest Western 
destroyers.38 China’s fishing fleet, also the world’s largest, is depleting 
fish stocks worldwide.39 In the vanguard of the fishing fleet is a force of 
government-subsidised and directed maritime mil itia (with vessels 
specifically constructed to ram  others)39F
40 that harass and intimidate 
other nations’ commercial vessels, with Chinese naval vessels lurking 
over the horizon. 
It is important to 
note that China is 
not merely replacing 
older bombers with 
improved ones; it 
appears to be 
growing the size of 
the force as well. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
14 ANALYSIS 
 
It is only in the realm of hard naval power that the United States has 
retained superiority, though the trend lines even there are distinctly 
negative. In recent years, the PLAN has been engaged in a naval 
buildup the likes of which has not been seen since the United States ’ 
“600-ship Navy” effort of the 1980s. 41 As an example, during the five 
years of 1982 –1986, the US Navy procured 86 warships ; 42 over the 
years 2016–2020, China appears to have launched almost as many 
( 8 0 ,  c o m p a r e d  t o  t h e  m e r e  3 6  t h a t  t h e  U S  N a v y  l a u n c h e d  o v e r  t h e  
same years). As a predictable result, the US Department of Defense 
recently assessed that China ’s Navy is now the “ largest navy in the 
world”43 in terms of the sheer number of ships (see Figure 2).44 Chinese 
shipyards have been seen churnin g out huge numbers of warships, 
including aircraft carriers,45 state-of-the-art multi-mission destroyers, 
and cruisers that are the world ’s largest current -production surface 
combatants. Ch ina has also been constructing modern at -sea 
replenishment ships and huge amphibious assault ships 46 to carry 
China’s rapidly-expanding Marine Corps.46F
47  
 
Figure 2: The US Department of Defense “Battle Force 2045” plan would rebalance its fleet away from larger ships, such 
as aircraft carriers and cruisers, to more numerous but smaller and cheaper vessels. 
 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 15 
 
The naval buildup has been visible , and quite obvious, in freely -
available satellite imagery or even in pictures taken from passing 
airliners.48 Recently, China showed off this production capacity by 
commissioning —  at a single ceremony  —  a new amphibious assault 
ship, a nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine, and a destroyer.49 
Given that there are ongoing or planned major expansions both at the 
primary shipyard that builds Chin a’s surface combatants and aircraft 
carriers,50 and at the one that builds its nuclear submarines,51 it seems 
that the pace of Chinese naval shipbuilding is unlikely to slow over the 
long term. In particular, there are signs at China ’s nuclear submarine 
shipyard that the production of a new class of submarines has begun,52 
one that is widely expected to be able to carry a number of long-range 
land attack cruise missiles. With the mobility afforded by nuclear power, 
such a submarine could reach striking range of Australia within a matter 
of days from leaving bases on the South China Sea. 
Many commentators have pointed out that China’s warships have been 
on average much smaller, and that the US Navy remains much larger in 
terms of its overall tonnage.53 Assuming that combat power at sea has 
a somewhat comparable den sity among modern warships, 54 tonnage 
may indeed be a better measure than the number of hulls, but by that 
measure the trend lines are little better. By the author ’s calculations, 
from 2016–2020 China launched more than 600 000 tonnes of 
warships, almost 50  per cent more than the United States launched 
over the same period (see Figure 3). When one considers
 the fact that 
the US Navy has worldwide responsibilities, with only about 60 per cent 
of naval forces allocated to the Pacific Fleet, the story is clearly worse 
in terms of regional naval power. While the US Pacific Fleet is currently 
much larger than the PLAN by tonnage, the author’s estimates indicate 
that, on current trend lines, the PLAN will reach near-parity on this basis 
in 15 to 20 years.  
As other observers have pointed out, this fleet will indeed become a 
maintenance and crewing burden. However, the manning, training, and 
maintenance demands of a larger fleet are largely predictable ones that 
Chinese planners have probably already considered, and China’s huge 
dual-purpose shipping industry should be well positioned to support 
fleet maintenance.  
Many commentators 
have pointed out 
that China’s 
warships have been 
on average much 
smaller, and that the 
US Navy remains 
much larger in terms 
of its overall 
tonnage. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
16 ANALYSIS 
 
 
Organisational and structural reforms 
On top of these obvious material manifestations of the PLA ’s growing 
reach, China’s military has also undergone comprehensive structural 
and personnel reforms in recent years that will further enable it to 
project power. Starting in 2015, China ’s military commenced major 
reforms in its organisation ,55 shifting from army- dominated Military 
Regions to joint Theatre Commands, forming a new PLA Ground Force 
headquarters, elevating China’s missile forces to a full service co-equal 
with the other PLA  branches, and establishing the PLA Strategic 
Support Force. In conjunction with major personnel reforms, which 
have been underway  in recent  years to improve the force ’s 
professionalism and readiness, 56 these efforts should enhance the 
year-round readiness of the PLA, and help transform the force into one 
“increasingly capable of conducting joint operations, fighting short, 
intensive and technologically sophisticated conflicts, and doing so 
farther from Chinese shores”.57  
In summary, when one casts an eye over a Chinese military that 
includes an increasin gly world -class and rapidly growing blue -water 
navy, the development of a large force of long-range strike aircraft, and 
an ever growing and highly threatening ballistic missile force, the 
impression is not of a defensive force intended only to uphold Chinese 
sovereignty and local interests, and to protect Chinese shipping 
against piracy. Rather, China ’
s military appears like a force being 
developed to eventually have the capability to eject (or better yet, to 
merely stare down) the United States —  and thereafter to dominate the 
security affairs of the western Pacific. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 17 
 
WHAT CHINA ’S MILITAR Y 
DEVELOPMENT MEANS TO  
AUSTRALIA  
Given the rapid pace of Chinese military development, any reasonable 
assessment of the PLA ’s threat to Australian national security should 
be placed on a sliding timeline, to assess where things stand now and 
where they appear to be heading. This assessment will  start with the 
current state of affairs, and then look at where current trends and 
future events could plausibly take it in the future. 
First, we must establish what Australia’s security interests are —  what 
it is that the PLA could threaten now and in the future. Australia’s 2020 
Strategic Update58 sets three primary strategic objectives for defence 
planning: 
1. Shaping Australia ’s strategic environment: being able to be an 
active and assertive advocate for stability, security, and 
sovereignty in Australia’s immediate region. 
2. Deterring actions against Australia’s interests: being able to hold 
potential adversaries ’ forces and infrastructure at risk from a 
distance, influencing their calculus in threatening Australian 
interests. This objective also includes deterring coercive or grey -
zone activities that could escalate into conventional conflict, as 
well as preventing actions that undermine regional resilience and 
sovereignty provided by Australian Defence Force (ADF) presence 
and engagement. 
3. Responding with credible military force: being prepared to fight a 
high intensity conflict if deterrence measures fail, supporting the 
United States and other partners where Australia ’s natio nal 
interests are threatened. 
 
  
First, we must 
establish what 
Australia’s security 
interests are —  what 
it is that the PLA 
could threaten now 
and in the future. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
18 ANALYSIS 
 
Near term (next 5–8 years):  
Australia could be drawn into a localised conflict with 
China, but Australia and its most vital interests remain 
secure 
While China already has a limited ability to strike some portions of 
Australia, for the next few years, the PLA will still lack the ability to 
significantly imperil Australia ’s vital nati onal interests or territorial 
integrity. This is because, for the most part, Chinese military power 
remains hemmed inside the First Island Chain, with other adversaries 
to worry about before it could reach and assault Australia ’s vital 
interests at scale. To be sure, the potential for conflict in the next few 
years does exist. US –China relations have been on a downward 
trajectory for a number of years, and China has been growing ever more 
bellicose regarding what it considers its unresolved civil war with 
Taiwan. Likewise, the United States and China have had a number of 
tense encounters
59 in the contested South China Sea (contested, in this 
case, largely due to China ’s expansive and illegitimate60 claims to the 
near-entirety of the islands and high seas within it), which in the future 
could provide opportunities for miscalculation to escalate into armed 
conflict. Tension with Japan over the Senkaku Islands continues to 
simmer, with a record number of incursions  into Japanese territorial 
waters during 2020.61 
Any hostilities against the PLA involving Australia would likely be to 
support like-minded Asian democratic partners and the United States. 
The arena of hostilities for any such conflict would be mostly confined 
to East Asia, with the possible exception of strikes against US forces 
using Darwin as a rear -area staging base. Due to the distance from 
China, any such strikes are likely to be limited in nature due to the sheer 
distance from China’s main operating bases on the Chinese mainland. 
Involvement by Australian forces would probably be expeditionary in 
nature, with a focus on air and maritime forces contributing to the 
struggle to gain and maintain allied air and sea control over contested 
sea areas in the western Pacific. In such a conflict, the PLAN is unlikely 
to be able to seriously threaten the SLOCs connecting Australia to the 
rest of the world, as it would already have its hands full with US and 
allied air and sea power within the region. 
Assuming ongoing US involvement and support, the PLA is unlikely to 
be able to seriously threaten the environment in Australia’s immediate 
region, nor Australia ’s sovereignty; China’s grey-zone capabilities will 
remain tied down for now in ongoing territorial disputes in China’s near 
abroad. And Australia seems likely to be able to continue to contribute 
meaningfully to supporting the United States and other partners, 
Any hostilities 
against the PLA 
involving Australia 
would likely be to 
support like-minded 
Asian democratic 
partners and the 
United States. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 19 
 
whether via basing assistance or means such as deployments of air and 
naval assets. 
In this nearer term, the most consequential means by which the PLA 
could imperil Australia ’s security interests would be to set in motion 
chains of causation that, further down the road, would imperil these 
interests. Were the PLA to engineer circumstances that led to the 
destruction, ejection, or withdrawal of US military power from the 
western Pacific, this would cause future changes to the balance of 
power in the region that could leave Australia and others open to 
coercion at the hands of the PLA. 
Longer term (8–20 years):  
China may attempt to drive the United States out of 
the western Pacific, and if successful will radically alter 
the balance of power in the region  
China appears to be building a force specifically intended to be able to 
eject the US military from the western Pacific by force, to stare it down 
in a crisis, or to encourag e the United States to step away from its 
current commitments due to overstretch, defeatism,
62 or frustration 
with allies. The latter could be inflamed by a perceived lack of 
commitment from some allies,63 particularly given the clear scale of the 
threat. While the degree of any such development could vary widely, 
even a partial withdrawal of US power from the western Pacific would 
accelerate the ongoing deterioration in the regional military balance, 
with profound consequences on the freedom of action of regional 
nations like Australia. 
Probably the worst-case scenario for Australia’s security would be one 
w h e r e  s o m e t h i n g  l i k e  t h e  f o l l o w i n g  s e q u e n c e  o c c u r s :  1 .  C h i n a  
successfully gains control of Taiwan either through force (invasion, 
bombardment, or blockade) or the threat thereof —  say, Taiwan 
negotiates terms given an ultimatum, particularly if it senses wavering 
US commitment. 2. After China consolidates Taiwan, piercing the First 
Island Chain and gaining control of ports and airfields in eastern 
Taiwan, Japan undergoes at least partial ‘Finlandization’64 and requests 
t h e  d e p a r t u r e  o f  U S  f o r c e s  f r o m  t h e  c o u n t r y .  3 .  H a v i n g  n o w  b e e n  
relieved of the necessity to dedicate resourc es to the capture of 
Taiwan, China is able to dedicate its attention to addressing security 
challenges further afield. 
In a less dramatic but still harmful sequence of events, the American 
public could become disenchanted with its security commitments in 
China may attempt 
to drive the United 
States out of the 
western Pacific, and 
if successful will 
radically alter the 
balance of power in 
the region. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
20 ANALYSIS 
 
the region. Given the growing regional challenge from the PLA, the 
United States could as a result adopt an ‘offshore balancing’ strategy, 
essentially withdrawing its main forces to the central or eastern Pacific 
and again exposing regional powers to a rapi dly declining military 
balance. This also could inspire the self-neutering of formerly powerful 
regional allies such as Japan and South Korea, releasing Chinese 
resources and attention for employment further afield. 
 
Figure 3: Warship tonnage launched by the major sea-going navies in the Indo-Pacific between 2016 and 2020 shows 
that approximately 60 per cent of the US Navy's ships are assigned to the Pacific Fleet. 
 
To help gain perspective on what an American departure from th e 
western Pacific might look like for the regional balance of military 
power, let us return briefly to the matter of fleet size, and specifically to 
warship building trends in the region. Figure 3 shows the total warship 
tonnage launched from 2016 through to 2020 for the major sea-going 
navies in the Indo-Pacific region, including the rough proportion of the 
US Navy that is assigned to the Pacific Fleet (about 60 per cent). Even 
with the US Navy in the region, on recent trends the maritime balance 
of power is likely to end up, at best, roughly even. But if we remove the 
US Pacific Fleet’s contribution from the total, the trend is that the PLAN 


AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 21 
 
would eventually exceed in size the rest of the major navies in the 
region combined and would dwarf any individual regional navy. Notably, 
these totals do not include the significant shipbuilding of China’s coast 
guard and maritime safety agencies, which have individual building 
programs that in terms of tonnage probably rival those of individual 
regional navies. This comparison also leaves out the PLA’s land-based 
maritime strike air and missile forces, wh ich no other regional power 
can remotely match.  
Even if the United States does not make a conscious decision to 
withdraw its maritime forces from the western Pacific, internal 
challenges may sap the relative strength of US sea power in the region. 
The US shipbuilding program is in turmoil, with a recognition in recent 
years that the previous “355-ship navy” plan was likely unaffordable
 
even before the large budget deficits generated by COVID- 19-related 
spending.65 As a result, near the end of the Trump administration, the 
US Department of Defense revealed a new “ Battle Force 2045” plan 
that would rebalance the fleet away from larger ships, such as aircraft 
carriers and cruisers, to more numerous but smaller and cheaper 
vessels, many of which would be unmanned or “lightly manned”.
66 While 
the plan is ambitious in its desire to alter the nature of naval warfare to 
maintain an advantage against the PLAN at expected budget levels, 
many of its elements remain unproven, its 
affordability is 
questionable,67 and the US Congress is already expressing its 
scepticism via cuts to related program funding. 68 What all of this is 
likely to mean to regional partners is that, even with a desire for a firm 
US commitment to the region, the US Navy will need all the help it can 
get in coming decades. 
What a Chinese-dominated Indo-Pacific would mean 
for Australia’s security interests 
If China were to achieve air and maritime dominance in the western 
Pacific, what would it really mean for Australia’s security interests and 
territorial integrity? After all, China and Australia have been engaged in 
peaceful trade for decades now. Why would the substitution of China’s 
grey hulls for those of the United States in Pacific waters make a 
difference? The answer lies in the coercive power that China would gain 
over the economy, livelihood, and even territorial integrity of Australia, 
and also in the demonstra ted willingness of China to engage in 
coercion (economic, for now) of Australia and other nations in the 
region. 
If China were to 
achieve air and 
maritime dominance 
in the western 
Pacific, what would 
it really mean for 
Australia’s security 
interests and 
territorial integrity? 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
22 ANALYSIS 
 
Some Australian thinkers have already begun to consider what a post-
American Asia might look like, and how Australia might best cope with 
the prospect. Hugh White’ s suggestion is to abandon, to a degree, 
general-purpose interoperability with the Un ited States and focus 
instead on capabilities such as larger numbers of submarines and 
fighter aircraft.
69 This would be in an attempt to exercise sea denial in 
Australia’s offshore waters or gain deterrence by threatening China ’s 
trade. 
While the prospect of potential US retrenchment may make a go -it-
alone plan like this seem tempting, a hard look at the numbers and 
forces involved makes clear that these concepts are likely to fail
 to 
maintain Australia’s safety and national security. 70 Australia is highly 
dependent71 on unimpeded access to overseas sources of energy,72 
food, and manufactured goods for its econ omic vitality, as well as 
access to markets for its own products. This reality is reflected in 
Australia’s 2016 Defence White Paper , which states, “Australia’s 
security and prosperity relies on a stable, rules -based global order 
which… facilitates free and open trade and enables unfettered access 
to the global commons to support economic development.”73 The more 
recent 2020 Defence Strategic Update reinforces this fact, stating that 
access through Australia’s immediate region is “critical for Australia’s 
security and trade”.74 Australia’s economy would be devastated by any 
long-term disruption of shipping routes, with typically only a few weeks’ 
worth of fuel on hand.74F
75 
Australia’s dependence on overseas SLOCs is where China’s long-term 
ambition to control its own SLOCs intersects with Australia ’s national 
security. Put simply, a China that can maintain the security of its own 
SLOCs is a China that can deny those SLOCs to others. This prospect, 
and not just the desire to counter a US intervention, is what truly drives 
the unprecedented scale of Chinese maritime expansion. It is also what 
threatens to give China major coercive power over the trade -
dependent democracies of the Indo-Pacific. China need not attempt to 
invade Australia to subdue it; it may only need to establish a blockade 
which, with the world ’s largest coast guard, 10 000 ton
 “maritime 
safety” vessels,76 and the most powerful navy in the region over the 
horizon, it could be well-equipped to do. 
Some might say that by building up the Australian submarine force, 
Australia could sufficiently threaten Chinese trade to ensure mutual 
deter r e n c e  ( H u g h  W h i t e  s u g g e s t s  d o u b l i n g  t h e  c u r r e n t  p l a n  t o  2 4  
hulls). But a few key numbers can help provide a sense of scale for 
doing so: over the course of the Second World War ’s titanic Battle of 
Some might say that 
by building up the 
Australian submarine 
force, Australia could 
sufficiently threaten 
Chinese trade to 
ensure mutual 
deterrence. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 23 
 
the Atlantic, Germany ’s U -boats sank nearly 3000 Allied me rchant 
ships and naval vessels over a span of several years, 77 losing almost 
8 0 0  s u b m a r i n e s  i n  t h e  p r o c e s s ,  a n d  s t i l l  l o s t  t h e i r  c a m p a i g n  t o  c u t  
Allied shipping across the Atlantic. By comparison, China ’s merchant 
m a r i n e  ( w i t h  H o n g  K o n g’s ships included) currently has more than  
6000 (on average much larger) ships.78 Additionally, over recent years 
the PLAN has significantly improved its anti-submarine warfare (ASW) 
capability, equipping virtually all of its newer surface combatants with 
towed array sonars, 79 developing new ASW -capable missiles  for its 
surface ships,80 and deploying its new fleet of ASW-capable fixed-wing 
patrol aircraft to its huge artificial island bases,81 which are strategically 
placed to provide coverage to China’s primary shipping routes across 
the South China Sea. While Australia ’s submarine force complements 
well the US Navy’s nuclear-powered submarine force and could play an 
integral role in any allied effort to contain the PLAN during a conflict, in 
my assessment it is unlikely to be able to —  on its own —  pose a 
sufficient deterrent threat to China via interdiction of Chinese seaborne 
trade. 
Beyond China’s potential future ability to interdict Australian overseas 
lines of communication, China is also on a path to develop an 
asymmetric ability strike directly at targets on the Australian continent. 
As described above, absent assistance from allies and partners like the 
United States, China already possesses the capability to strike 
Australia from existing PLA bases, either with bomber aircraft or with 
long-range missiles. China’s pending introduction of an 
air-refuellable 
long-range stealth bomber (the H-20) would worsen this asymmetry.82  
With regard to China’s future ability to take and hold territory far from 
home, it is important to stress that a Chinese invasion of the Australian 
mainland is so unlikely that it can be dismissed as a scenario on which 
Australia should base its defence planning. Nevertheless, China is the 
world’s largest shipbuilder, and its prime s hipyards are dual -purpose 
producers of civilian and military vessels. During the American 
emergency shipbuilding program of the Second World War, which 
supported massive, mechanised armies in two theatres of war 
thousands of kilometres from the United Stat es, US shipbuilding 
production peaked at 18.5 million tons
 annually , w ith 5 3 million  t ons  
built over the course of the war. 83 In 2020, during peacet ime, China 
built more than 38 million tons of shipping, 84 and China’s merchant 
fleet (including Hong Kong ’s) totalled more than 300 million tons .85 
China’s shipyards have recently commenced serial production of large 
amphibious assault ships, with three 35 000 ton Type 075 Landing 
Ship Docks (LHDs) launched 
within the past two years  alone.86 
Beyond China’s 
potential future ability 
to interdict Australian 
overseas lines of 
communication, China 
is also on a path to 
develop an 
asymmetric ability 
strike directly at 
targets on the 
Australian continent. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
24 ANALYSIS 
 
Combined with what is on pace to be the region ’s largest force of 
warships on any measure by far —  and one that in the future seems 
likely to field multiple carrier strike groups — China has the potential to 
field a long -range se alift and power projection capacity that would 
dwarf anything that the Japanese threatened Australia with during the 
Second World War. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 25 
 
CONCLUSION 
War between Australia and China remains a remote possibility. But by 
its very nature, defence policy operates in the realm of low-probability, 
high-consequence events. And the sheer ability of the PLA to project 
military force over long distances places pressure on decision- makers 
whose actions are weighted with the fear that such force might be used 
against them. This is the essence of coercion. 
As to the plausibility of China using military threats to coerce Australia, 
this question has essentially been answered by demonstrated 
behaviour —  first, in China ’s attempts to intimidate Australia 
economically, and second in its manifest willingness to use the threat 
of force to get its way elsewhere. In its recent list of 14 grievances with 
Australia,
87 China has indicated that resolution of its current efforts at 
economic coercion of Australia will require fundamental changes in the 
nature of Australia as a functioning democracy, such as the freedom of 
Australian leaders and thinkers to speak out on human rights issues as 
they see fit. For now, this coercion is largely economic in nature. As 
detailed, the PLA currently lacks the military reach to do otherwise. But 
as the reach of China ’s power projection capability grows, one need 
only ask Vietnam and the Philippines – both subject to threats of force 
by Chinese naval and maritime constabulary forces in recent years —  
what Chinese military coercion feels like. Australians should be clear -
eyed enough to recognise that similar treatment could be in store for 
them. 
 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
26 ANALYSIS 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The author is grateful to the Lowy Institute, and to Sam Roggeveen for 
support and guidance, Clare Caldwell for detailed copy edits, and two 
anonymous reviewers for their very helpful feedback. Any errors are the 
fault of the author alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 27 
 
NOTES  
Banner image: Chinese President Xi Jinping with People’s Liberation Army 
navy soldiers at a ceremony to welcome King Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa of 
Bahrain to Beijing in 2013. Image: Feng Li/Getty Images. 
1 Peter Howarth, China’s Rising Sea Power: The PLA Navy’s Submarine 
Challenge (London, Routledge, 2006), 119–123. 
2 Bernard Cole, The Great Wall at Sea: China’s Navy in the Twenty-First 
Century (Annapolis, Naval Institute Press, 2010), 173.  
3 Daniel Hartnett, “The Father of the Modern Chinese Navy — Liu Huaqing”, 
Center for International Maritime Security, 8 October 2014, 
https://cimsec.org/father-modern-chinese-navy-liu-huaqing/. 
4 2015 Chinese Defence White Paper, “China’s Military Strategy: The State 
Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China”, May 2015, 
Beijing, http://www.andrewerickson.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/China-Defense-White-Paper_2015_English-
Chinese_Annotated.pdf. 
5 2019 Chinese Defence White Paper, “China’s National Defense in the New 
Era”, The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of 
China, July 2019, https://www.andrewerickson.com/2019/07/full-text-of-
defense-white-paper-chinas-national-defense-in-the-new-era-english-
chinese-versions/. 
6 Toshi Yoshihara and James Holmes, Red Star over the Pacific: China’s Rise and 
the Challenge to US Maritime Strategy (Annapolis, Naval Institute Press, 
2018), 132. 
7 Maria Abi-Habib, “How China Got Sri Lanka to Cough up a Port”, The New 
York Times, 2 July 2018, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/25/world/asia/china-sri-lanka-
port.html. 
8 Adnan Aamir, “Afghan Transit a Game Changer for Gwadar Port”, 31 January 
2020, The Interpreter, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-
interpreter/afghan-transit-game-changer-gwadar-port. 
9 “Gwadar Development Authority Master Plan 2017–2050”, GDA Master 
Plan, 7 August 2019, http://www.gda.gov.pk/masterplan/. 
10 “Military–Civil Fusion Lexicon”, Chinese Aerospace Studies Institute, 15 
March 2021, 
https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Articles/Tag/166916/military-civil-
fusion/. 
 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
28 ANALYSIS 
 
 
11 Thomas Shugart, “Some *Potentially* Interesting Dredging in Cambodia”, 
Twitter, 30 September 2020, 
https://twitter.com/tshugart3/status/1310997218694897664. 
12 Thomas Shugart, “A Chinese-Built Airport Next Door to a Key Australia–US 
Naval Base?”, The Interpreter, 7 August 2020, 
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/chinese-built-airport-next-
door-australia-us-funded-navy-port. 
13 Thomas Shugart, “China’s Artificial Islands are Bigger (and a Bigger Deal) 
Than You Think”, War on the Rocks, 21 September 2016, 
https://warontherocks.com/2016/09/chinas-artificial-islands-are-bigger-
and-a-bigger-deal-than-you-think/. 
14 Michael D Swaine, Ezra F Vogel, Paul Heer, J Stapleton Roy, Rachel Esplin 
Odell, Mike Mochizuki, Avery Goldstein, and Alice Miller, “The Overreach 
of the China Hawks”, Foreign Affairs, 23 October 2020, 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2020-10-23/overreach-
china-
hawks?utm_source=twitter_posts&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=
tw_daily_soc. 
15 “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of 
China”, US Department of Defense, 
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-
DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. 
16 Henry Boyd, “2019 Pentagon Report: China’s Rocket Force Trajectory”, 
International Institute for Strategic Studies, Military Balance Blog, 15 May 
2019, 
https://www.iiss.org/blogs/military-balance/2019/05/pla-rocket-
force-trajectory. 
17 Joshua H Pollack and Scott LaFoy, “China’s DF-26: A Hot-Swappable 
Missile?”, Arms Control Wonk, 17 May 2020, 
https://www.armscontrolwonk.com/archive/1209405/chinas-df-26-a-
hot-swappable-missile/. 
18 Joseph Trevithick, “China Leaks Video of Mysterious Ground-Launched 
Missile”, The Drive, 27 September 2019, https://www.thedrive.com/the-
war-zone/30058/lets-talk-about-this-previously-unseen-ground-
launched-missile-that-china-just-leaked. 
19 “PLA Rocket Force Launches DF-26’s ‘Aircraft Carrier Killer’ Missile in Fast-
reaction Drills”, Global Times, 6 August 2020, 
https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1196944.shtml. 
20 Jacob Cohn, Timothy A Walton, Adam Lemon, and Toshi Yoshihara, 
“Leveling the Playing Field: Reintroducing US Theater-Range Missiles in a 
Post-Inf World”, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2019, 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 29 
 
 
https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/Leveling_the_Playing_Field_
web_Final_1.pdf.  
21 Peter Kouretsos, “Tightening the Chain: Implementing a Strategy of 
Maritime Pressure in the Pacific”, Center for International Maritime 
Security, 2 October 2019, https://cimsec.org/tightening-the-chain-
implementing-a-strategy-of-maritime-pressure-in-the-pacific/. 
22 David Axe, “The Startling Mystery of China’s Suddenly-Appearing Carrier-
Killer Missiles”, Forbes, 3 September 2020, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2020/09/03/the-startling-
mystery-of-chinas-suddenly-appearing-carrier-killer-
missiles/?sh=1518c9795a47. 
23 Josh Rogin, “China’s Military Expansion Will Test the Biden Administration”, 
The Washington Post, 3 December 2020, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/chinas-
military-expansion-will-test-the-biden-
administration/2020/12/03/9f05e92a-35a7-11eb-8d38-
6aea1adb3839_story.html. 
24 Liu Xuanzun, “PLA Rocket Force Launches DF-26 ‘Aircraft Carrier Killer’ 
Missile in Fast-Reaction Drills”, Global Times, 6 August 2020, 
https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1196944.shtml. 
25 Ankit Panda, “The PLARF’s New Hainan Island Base and China’s Recent 
Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile Test”, The Diplomat, 3 July 2019, 
https://thediplomat.com/2019/07/the-plarfs-new-hainan-island-base-
and-chinas-recent-anti-ship-ballistic-missile-tests/. 
26 Thomas Shugart and Javier Gonzalez, “First Strike: China’s Missile Threat to 
US Bases in Asia”, Center for a New American Security, June 2017, 
https://s3.us-east-
1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/documents/CNASReport-FirstStrike-
Final.pdf?mtime=20170626140814&focal=none. 
27 Ibid, 13. 
28 “2020 Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat”, Defense Intelligence Ballistic 
Missile Analysis Committee, 2020, 25, 
https://media.defense.gov/2021/Jan/11/2002563190/-1/-
1/1/2020%20BALLISTIC%20AND%20CRUISE%20MISSILE%20THREAT
_FINAL_2OCT_REDUCEDFILE.PDF. 
29 Franz-Stefan Gady, “PLAAF Deploys Anti-Ship Cruise Missile-Carrying H-
6J”, The Diplomat, via Real Clear Defense, 12 October 2018, 
https://www.realcleardefense.com/2018/10/12/plaaf_deploys_anti-
ship_cruise_missile-carrying_h-6j_304722.html.  
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
30 ANALYSIS 
 
 
30 George Allison, “China Warns UK against Sending Carrier to South China 
Sea”, UK Defence Journal, 2 January 2021, 
https://ukdefencejournal.org.uk/china-warns-uk-against-sending-carrier-
to-south-china-sea/. 
31 “H-6K Long-Range Strategic Bomber”, Military Today, http://www.military-
today.com/aircraft/h6k.htm. 
32 “Chinese Navy Debuts Latest Long Range Bomber H-6J in South China Sea 
Drill”, Defense World, 30 July 2020, 
https://www.defenseworld.net/news/27545/Chinese_Navy_Debuts_Lat
est_Long_Ranger_Bomber_H_6J_in_South_China_Sea_Drill#.YLR4n6gza
Ul. 
33 Mike Yeo, “Video Reveals Chinese H-6N Bomber Carrying Suspected 
Hypersonic Weapon”, Defense News, 19 October 2020, 
https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2020/10/19/video-
reveals-chinese-h-6n-bomber-carrying-suspected-hypersonic-weapon/. 
34 J Michael Dahm, “Offensive and Defensive Strike: South China Sea Military 
Capability Series — A Survey of Technologies and Capabilities on China’s 
Military Outposts in the South China Sea”, Johns Hopkins Applied 
Physics Laboratory, March 2021, 
https://www.jhuapl.edu/Content/documents/OffensiveDefensiveStrike.p
df. 
35 “Xian H-6 Strategic Bomber Aircraft (1959)”, Military Factory, 27 April 2020, 
https://www.militaryfactory.com/aircraft/detail.php?aircraft_id=769. 
36 Rear Admiral Michael McDevitt, “Becoming a Great ‘Maritime Power’: A 
Chinese Dream,” CNA, June 2016, 
https://www.cna.org/cna_files/pdf/irm-2016-u-013646.pdf. 
37 “Ships Built by Country of Building, Annual”, United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development, 
http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId
=89493. 
38 Li Jiayao, “China’s First Homegrown 10,000-ton Maritime Patrol Vessel to 
be Commissioned”, China Military, 13 January 2021, 
http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2021-01/13/content_9967224.htm. 
39 “300 Chinese Fishing Ships off South America Coast Raise Food Security 
Worries”, Voa News, 25 September 2020, 
https://www.voanews.com/east-asia-pacific/voa-news-china/300-
chinese-fishing-ships-south-america-coast-raise-food-security. 
40 Mike Yeo, “Testing the Waters: China’s Maritime Militia Challenges Foreign 
Forces at Sea”, Defense News, 31 May 2019, 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 31 
 
 
https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2019/05/31/testing-
the-waters-chinas-maritime-militia-challenges-foreign-forces-at-sea/. 
41 Rudy Abramson, “Reagan Renews Vow for 600-Ship Navy: ‘Way to Prevent 
War is to be Prepare for It,’ He Tells Academy Class”, LA Times, 23 May 
1985, https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1985-05-23-mn-8052-
story.html. 
42 “Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for 
Congress”, Congressional Research Service, 1 May 2021, 
https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6882906/Navy-Force-
Structure-and-Shipbuilding-Plans.pdf. 
43 John Grady, “Pentagon Report: China Now Has World’s Largest Navy as 
Beijing Expands Military Influence”, USNI News, 1 September 2020, 
https://news.usni.org/2020/09/01/pentagon-report-china-now-has-
worlds-largest-navy-as-beijing-expands-military-influence. 
44 “China Naval Modernization: Implications for US Navy Capabilities — 
Background and Issues for Congress”, Congressional Research Service, 
9 March 2021, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL33153.pdf. 
45 “Tracking China’s Third Aircraft Carrier”, China Power, 17 September 2020, 
https://chinapower.csis.org/china-carrier-type-002/. 
46 Rick Joe, “The Future of China’s Amphibious Assault Fleet”, The Diplomat, 17 
July 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/07/the-future-of-chinas-
amphibious-assault-fleet/. 
47 Dennis J Blasko and Roderick Lee, “The Chinese Navy’s Marine Corps, Part 
1: Expansion and Reorganization”, The Jamestown Foundation, 1 
February 2019, https://jamestown.org/program/the-chinese-navys-
marine-corps-part-1-expansion-and-reorganization/. 
48 Xavier Vavasseur, “15 Destroyers & 1 Aircraft Carrier under Construction at 
China’s Jiangnan Shipyard”, Naval News, 11 March 2019, 
https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2019/03/15-destroyers-1-
aircraft-carrier-under-construction-at-chinas-jiangnan-shipyard/. 
49 “China Commissions Three Naval Vessels (Type 094, Type 055 and Type 
075)”, CCTV.com, 24 April 2021, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Od8q34bYBk. 
50 Minnie Chan, “China Speeds up Building Aircraft Carriers but will PLA 
Sailors be Trained for Hi-tech Ships in Time?”, South China Morning Post, 
5 January 2021, 
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3116402/china-
speeds-building-aircraft-carriers-will-pla-sailors-be. 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
32 ANALYSIS 
 
 
51 H I Sutton, “Chinese Increasing Nuclear Submarine Shipyard Capacity”, 
USNI News, 12 October 2020, 
https://news.usni.org/2020/10/12/chinese-increasing-nuclear-
submarine-shipyard-capacity. 
52 H I Sutton, “First Image of China’s New Nuclear Submarine under 
Construction”, Naval News, 1 February 2021, 
https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2021/02/first-image-of-chinas-
new-nuclear-submarine-under-construction/. 
53 “The US Navy Remains ahead of China’s”, The New York Times, 8 September 
2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/08/opinion/letters/united-
states-navy-china.html. 
54 Factors that could cause this to be more likely would include similarities in 
warship design and capability, sufficiency of fleet logistics, and the state 
of personnel and materiel readiness. Factors that could cause 
divergence might include significant differences in munitions capability 
and magazine depth, effectiveness of command and control (C2) and 
fleet employment, and the ability to cope with battle damage.  
55 Bates Gill and Adam Ni, “China’s Sweeping Military Reforms: Implications 
for Australia”, Security Challenges, 15:1 (2019), 33–46, 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/26644516.pdf.  
56 Marcus Clay and Dennis J Blasko, “People Win Wars: The PLA Enlisted 
Force, and Other Related Matters”, War on the Rocks, 31 July 2020, 
https://warontherocks.com/2020/07/people-win-wars-the-pla-enlisted-
force-and-other-related-matters/. 
57 Gill and Ni, “China’s Sweeping Military Reforms”, 33, 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/26644516.pdf. 
58 2020 Defence Strategic Update & 2020 Force Structure Plan, Department 
of Defence, 1 July 2020, https://www1.defence.gov.au/strategy-
policy/strategic-update-2020. 
59 Jesse Johnson, “Photos Confirm US–China Warships’ Near Miss as Experts 
Say South China Sea Encounter Likely to Affect Allied Operations in the 
Region”, Japan Times, 3 October 2018, 
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2018/10/03/asia-pacific/u-s-says-
photos-near-collision-chinese-warship-south-china-sea-legitimate/. 
60 Robert D Williams, “Tribunal Issues Landmark Ruling in South China Sea 
Arbitration”, Lawfare, Blog, 12 July 2016, 
https://www.lawfareblog.com/tribunal-issues-landmark-ruling-south-
china-sea-arbitration. 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 33 
 
 
61 Tsuruta Jun, “The Chinese Coast Guard and the Senkaku”, The Diplomat, 30 
December 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/12/the-chinese-coast-
guard-and-the-senkaku/. 
62 Michael D Swaine, Jessica J Lee, and Rachel Esplin Odell, “Toward an 
Inclusive & Balanced Regional Order: A New US Strategy in East Asia”, 
Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, Paper No 5, 11 January 2021, 
https://quincyinst.org/2021/01/11/toward-an-inclusive-balanced-
regional-order-a-new-u-s-strategy-in-east-
asia/?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=internal&utm_campaign=ea202
1. 
63 David Brunnstrom, “US Says Taiwan Military Budget Boost Insufficient for 
‘Resilient Defense’”, Reuters, 7 October 2020, 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-taiwan-china/u-s-says-taiwan-
military-budget-boost-insufficient-for-resilient-defense-
idUSKBN26R3SH. 
64 ‘Finlandization’ is a situation in which a nation remains nominally 
independent but abides by foreign policy rules set by a more powerful 
state, such as was the fate of Finland under the Soviets after the Second 
World War. See Andrew F Krepinevich, “China’s ‘Finlandization’ Strategy 
in the Pacific”, The Wall Street Journal, 11 September 2010, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240527487041649045754217
53851404076. 
65 “An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan”, Congress of 
the United States Congressional Budget Office, October 2019, 
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/55685. 
66 “Transcript: Secretary of Defense Remarks at CSVA on the NDS and Future 
Defense Modernization Priorities”, US Department of Defense, 6 October 
2020, 
https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/237
4866/secretary-of-defense-remarks-at-csba-on-the-nds-and-future-
defense-modernizatio/. 
67 Gina Harkins, “The Navy Really Does Need 500 Ships, Experts Say. But 
Paying for Them Won’t be Easy”, Miliary.com, 8 October 2020, 
https://www.military.com/daily-news/2020/10/08/navy-really-does-
need-500-ships-experts-say-paying-them-wont-be-easy.html. 
68 David B Larter, “Unclear on Unmanned: The US Navy’s Plans for Robot 
Ships are on the Rocks”, Defense News, 10 January 2021, 
https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/surface-navy-
association/2021/01/10/unclear-on-unmanned-the-us-navys-plans-for-
robot-ships-are-on-the-rocks/. 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
 
34 ANALYSIS 
 
 
69 Hugh White, How to Defend Australia, (Melbourne: La Trobe University 
Press, 2019). 
70 Hugh White, “Australia Must Plan to Defend Itself Alone”, The Strategist, 
Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 13 January 2020, 
https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/australia-must-plan-to-defend-itself-
alone/. 
71 Anthony Richardson, “Australia Imports Almost All of Its Oil, and There are 
Pitfalls All over the Globe”, The Conversation, 24 May 2018, 
https://theconversation.com/australia-imports-almost-all-of-its-oil-and-
there-are-pitfalls-all-over-the-globe-97070. 
72 “Is Australia Running Out of Fuel? PM Orders Supply Review”, BBC News, 7 
May 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/business-44027042. 
73 2016 Defence White Paper, Department of Defence, 
https://www.defence.gov.au/WhitePaper/Docs/2016-Defence-White-
Paper.pdf. 
74 2020 Defence Strategic Update & 2020 Force Structure Plan, Department 
of Defence, 1 July 2020, https://www1.defence.gov.au/strategy-
policy/strategic-update-2020. 
75 Benedict Brook, “Controversial Call to Hike Petrol Prices to Secure 
Australia’s Fuel Security”, News.com.au, 14 September 2020, 
https://www.news.com.au/technology/motoring/on-the-
road/controversial-call-to-hike-petrol-prices-to-secure-australias-fuel-
security/news-story/fe75f57d995c204923202e768c7dea41. 
76 “China to Commission First 10,000 Ton-Class Maritime Patrol Ship in Mid-
2021, Global Times, 14 January 2021, 
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202101/1212753.shtml. 
77 “British and German Submarine Statistics of World War II”, Naval Historical 
Society of Australia, December 1972, 
https://www.navyhistory.org.au/british-and-german-submarine-
statistics-of-world-war-ii/. 
78 “Merchant Fleet by Country of Beneficial Ownership, Annual, 2014–2020, 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 
http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId
=80100. 
79 Rick Joe, “The Chinese Navy’s Growing Anti-Submarine Warfare 
Capabilities”, The Diplomat, 12 September 2018, 
https://thediplomat.com/2018/09/the-chinese-surface-fleets-growing-
anti-submarine-warfare-capabilities/. 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA’S MIL ITARY 
 
ANALYSIS 35 
 
 
80 Lyle J Goldstein, “China’s New Missile-Torpedo May Curb US Submarine 
Power”, The National Interest, 16 August 2016, 
https://nationalinterest.org/feature/its-missile-its-torpedo-its-chinas-
new-anti-submarine-weapon-17374. 
81 Lu Li-shih, “China’s Expanding Military Reach”, Taipei Times, 27 May 2020, 
https://taipeitimes.com/News/editorials/archives/2020/05/27/2003737
098; and Xavier Vavasseu, “New Details on China’s KQ-200 Maritime 
Patrol Aircraft”, Naval News, 29 April 2019, 
https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2019/04/new-details-on-
chinas-kq-200-maritime-patrol-aircraft/. 
82 Bradley Perrett, “China’s New Bomber Should be Cause for Concern for 
Australia”, The Strategist, Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 4 February 
2021, https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/chinas-new-bomber-should-be-
cause-for-concern-for-australia/. 
83 “US Shipping and Shipbuilding: Trends and Policy Choices”, Congressional 
Budget Office, August 1984, 
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/98th-congress-1983-
1984/reports/1984_09_shipping.pdf. 
84 “China’s Shipbuilding Industry Keeps World-Leading Role in 2020”, Xinhua, 
29 July 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2021-
01/17/c_139675164.htm?bsh_bid=5581204107. 
85 “Dead Weight Tons in Thousands — 2019”, United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development, 
http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx. 
86 Xavier Vavasseur, “China Launches 3rd Type 075 LHD for the PLAN”, Naval 
News, 29 January 2021, https://www.navalnews.com/naval-
news/2021/01/china-launches-3rd-type-075-lhd-for-the-plan/. 
87 Jonathan Kearsley, Eryk Bagshaw, and Anthony Galloway, “’If You Make 
China the Enemy, China will be the Enemy’: Beijing’s Fresh Threat to 
Australia”, The Sydney Morning Herald, 18 November 2020, 
https://www.smh.com.au/world/asia/if-you-make-china-the-enemy-
china-will-be-the-enemy-beijing-s-fresh-threat-to-australia-20201118-
p56fqs.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GR OWING REACH OF CHINA ’S MILITARY 
36 ANALYSIS 
This page has intentionally been left blank. 

AUSTRALIA AND THE GROWING REACH OF CHINA’S MILITARY 
ANALYSIS 
ABOUT THE A UTHOR 
Tom Shugart is an Adjunct Senior Fellow with the Defense Program at the 
Center for a New American Security. His research focuses on undersea 
warfare and maritime competition, military innovation and acquisition, 
and the broader military balance in the Indo-Pacific. He served for over 25 
years in the US Navy, where he last worked in the Defense 
Department’s Office of Net Assessment. He served as a submarine 
warf
are officer during his military service, deploying multiple times to 
the Indo-P acific region and commanding the nuclear-p owered fast 
attack submarine USS Olympia (SSN 717) from 2013 to 2016. 
Following his submarine command tour, he served on the Navy 
Staff as the principal officer providing oversight of the Columbia 
Class SSBN Program, the Navy’s  highest-priority acquisition effort. 
Over the course of his military career, he served aboard both fast attack 
and ballistic missile submarines as well as at shore headquarters; he also 
served on the Joint Staff as the principal officer responsible for nuclear 
strike p lanning, advising of  senior Defense Department leaders on 
nuclear weapons employment plans, and the training of Presid ential 
military aides and command centre personnel on nuclear command and 
control. 
His writing has appeared in War on the Rocks, the National Interest, the 
US Naval Institute’s Proceedings, and the Lowy Institute’s Interpreter. He 
has provided expert testimony to the US-C hina Commission and the 
Senate Foreign Relations C ommittee, and h as been quoted  in 
publications such as The New York Times, The Wall Street Journ al, The 
Japan Times, CNN.com, and The Economist. During a previous 
assignment to the Center for a New American Security as a Navy 
Fellow in 2017 he published the highly influential study First Strike: 
China’s Missile Threat to US Bases in Asia, which has been cited in 
numerous US and international think tank reports and studies. 
Tom is a graduate of the US Naval War College, where he holds an MA in 
National Security and Strategic Studies. During his time there, he 
served as a full-t ime member and Red Force commander of the Halsey 
Alfa Group, gaming near-f uture operational-tactical warf ighting in East 
Asia. He is also a graduate in Mechanical Engineering of the University of 
Texas at Austin, and received postgraduate training in nuclear 
engineering from the US Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program. He is an 
instrument-rated Commercial Pilot and FAA-Certified Flight Instructor. 
Tom Shugart 


31 Bligh Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Tel. +61 2 8238 9000 
Fax +61 2 8238 9005 
lowyinstitute.org 
@LowyInstitute 