 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BEN JAMIN  HERSCOVITCH & MARK HARRISON  
DECEMBER 2023  
 
POLICY BRIEF  
Enhancing Australia’s 
Taiwan ties 
 
 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES 
POLICY BRIEF  
The Lowy Institute is an independent policy think tank. Its mandate ranges 
across all the dimensions of international policy debate in Australia —  
economic, political and strategic —  and it is not limited to a particular 
geographic region. Its two core tasks are to: 
• produce distinctive research and fresh policy options for Australia’s 
international policy and to contribute to the wider international debate 
• promote discussion of Australia’s role in the world by providing an 
accessible and high -quality forum for discussion of Australian 
international relations through debates, seminars, lectures, dialogues 
and conferences. 
Lowy Institute Policy Briefs are designed to address a particular, current 
policy issue and to suggest solutions. They are deliberately prescriptive, 
specifically addressing two questions: What is the problem? What should 
be done?  
Responsibility for the views, information, or advice expressed in this report 
is that of the author/s. The contents of this report do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Lowy Institute. 

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  1 
 
CONTENTS  
 
Key findings 2 
What is the problem? 3 
What should be done? 3 
China’s assertiveness and Australia’s policy options 4 
Deepening Australia’s political and trade ties with Taiwan 8 
Implications for the Australia–China relationship 13 
Notes 16 
 
 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
2 POLICY BRIEF  
 
KEY FINDINGS  
 
• Australia should articulate and pursue a disciplined Taiwan strategy that 
uses the flexibility of its one-China policy to increase engagement with Taipei 
in service of Australian economic and security interests. 
• Canberra should support Taipei’s bid for entry into the Comprehensive and 
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership and start negotiations 
for a bilateral free trade agreement. It should also establish regular 
ministerial exchanges with Taiwan. 
• The Taiwan strategy advocated in this paper is likely to be a net negative for 
Australia’s relations with China. But it strikes a reasonable balance between 
Australia’s interests and the stabilisation of the Australia–China relationship. 
 
  

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  3 
 
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?  
Australia’s economic and political engagement with the self-governed island of 
Taiwan has been constrained by inconsistent and tentative policy under 
diplomatic pressure from Beijing. Economically, Australian interests have been 
hurt by China’s so-far successful effort to stop Canberra pursuing a free trade 
agreement with Taipei. Politically, Australia has contributed to Taipei’s 
international isolation by not more fully taking advantage of the freedom to 
manoeuvre granted by the ambiguities of its one-China policy. If left unchecked, 
this deepening international isolation could eventually endanger both Taiwan’s 
de facto independence and its liberal democracy. 
 
WHAT SHOULD BE DONE? 
Canberra should strengthen trade and political engagement with Taiwan through 
a strategy of consistent policy and messaging to counteract China’s efforts to 
isolate Taiwan, maximise the economic potential for Australia, and assert 
Canberra’s freedom to deepen ties with Taipei. Australia should support Taiwan’s 
bid for membership of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-
Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), commence bilateral free trade agreement (FTA) 
negotiations, and send ministers to visit Taipei on a regular schedule. With this 
Taiwan policy architecture, Australia will be able to build its institutional capacity 
to manage the relationship across differe nt domains, communicate a clear, 
consistent, and coherent position on Taiwan to stakeholders both domestically 
and internationally, and pursue mutually beneficial opportunities in the bilateral 
relationship.  
The Taiwan strategy advocated in this paper is likely to be a complicating factor 
for Australia’s relations with China. However, Beijing’s pursuit of a normalisation 
of diplomatic and trade ties with Canberra, the consistency of these 
recommendations with Australia’s one-China policy, its overlap with positions 
taken by Australia’s allies and partners, and the already fraught nature of 
Australia–China ties across a wide range of policy arenas, mean this Taiwan 
strategy is unlikely to significantly further d isrupt relations with China. To 
manage Chinese government concerns, this Taiwan strategy can be combined 
with reassurances to Beijing that Canberra continues to adhere to its one-China 
policy and does not support Taiwanese independence. 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
4 POLICY BRIEF  
 
CHINA’S ASSERTIVENESS AND 
AUSTRALIA’S POLICY OPTIONS  
I n  t h e  X i  J i n p i n g  e r a ,  a n d  e s p e c i a l l y  s i n c e  t h e  2 0 1 6  e l e c t i o n  o f  T a i w a n ’ s  
Democratic Progressive Party President Tsai Ing -Wen, Beijing has adopted a 
more belligerent and uncompromising stance towards Taipei. In 2022, the third 
Taiwan white paper was releas ed by the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State 
Council, which reiterated Beijing’s commitment to unification under its “One 
Country, Two Systems” formulation and signalled China’s willingness to act 
against what it defines as “separatist elements or externa l forces”.
1 Beijing’s 
Taiwan policy has been supported by the goal of developing the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) into a peer competitor of the US military and with far 
greater power than Taiwan’s armed forces.2 Beijing is using more inflammatory 
political rhetoric and has systematically escalated its military threats with 
frequent air force and naval activity in the Taiwan Strait, serving to regularise a 
PLA military presence around Taiwan. 
Sources for 1, 2, 3 see Notes on p. 16. 


ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  5 
 
These growing military threats have been met with repeated commitments to 
defend Taiwan by US President Joe Biden and a heightened global focus on the 
stratospheric costs of military conflict in the Taiwan Strait. 3 As Australia’s 
Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator Penny Wong plainly stated in April 2023, “A 
war over Taiwan would be catastrophic for all.”4 It is, of course, prudent to seek 
to deter conflict and develop contingency plans for the possibility of a full-scale 
PLA amphibious invasion across the Taiwan Strait. Yet this disastrous possibility 
should not cause Australia to overlook all the low -risk policy steps that can be 
taken now to help maintain the status quo of cross- Strait peace and stability. 
Without seeking to answer the question of whether and under what 
circumstances Australia should join a US-led military campaign to repel Chinese 
military aggression against Taiwan, this paper argues that Canberra can and 
should step up trade and political engagement with Taipei now. As well as serving 
Australian economic interests, such measures will aid Taiwan’s effort to preserve 
its international space and secure its ongoing de facto independence.  
 
 
Australia’s emphasis on trade maximisation  has enabled Taiwan to become one of its 
largest export markets (Shaah Shahidh/Unsplash) 
 
Moreover, increased economic and political engagement is necessary if the 
Albanese government hopes to achieve its regularly articulated goal of 
maintaining the status quo in the Taiwan Strait.5 As part of China’s efforts to alter 
the status quo in its favour, Beijing has sought to isolate Taipei. China has 
pursued a sustained and systematic strategy aimed at both prying Taiwan’s 
formal diplomatic partners away and dissuading other capitals from engaging 


ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
6 POLICY BRIEF  
 
with Taipei.6 As the collapse in Australian ministerial visits to Taiwan suggests 
(see Figure 2), Canberra may have already allowed Beijing to redefine an aspect 
of its engagement with Taipei. If Australia is to contribute to the maintenance of 
a cross-Strait status quo in which Taiwan remains politically and economically 
engaged with the world, then Canberra will need to do more to counteract 
China’s efforts to isolate the island.  
The foundation of Australia’s approach to cross-Strait ties is a one-China policy 
established when Australia entered diplomatic relations with the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) in 1972. Australia recognised the government in Beijing 
as the sole legal go vernment of China and ended its recognition of Taipei but 
only went so far as to acknowledge Beijing’s position that Taiwan is a province of 
the PRC.
7 With this ambiguity, Canberra built a relationship with China in which 
it grew to become Australia’s largest trading partner, while also maintaining  
meaningful ties with Taipei through mechanisms that did not fall under the labels 
and practices of formal state-to-state relations. In this way, Australia’s one-China 
policy is a key component of Australia’s contemporary international relations. 
 
Beijing’s Taiwan policy has been supported by the goal of developing the PLA into a peer 
competitor of the US military (Elliott Fabrizio/US Department of Defense/Flickr) 
 
This architecture has served Australia adequately over several decades. Within 
the limits of Australia’s one -China policy and the calculus of Australia –China 
relations, Australia’s emphasis on trade maximisation has enabled Taiwan to 
become one of its largest export markets. 8 The bilateral economic relationship 
has also seen Australia emerge as Taiwan’s seventh-largest trading partner and 
has in the past helped Taipei increase its international engagement through 


ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  7 
 
initiatives such as the Asia -Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. But in 
the last decade, Canberra’s existing policy architecture appears to have become 
more susceptible to pressure from Beijing to cease pursuing additional bilateral 
and multilateral  trade agreements with Taipei and limit Australia’s political 
engagement with the island (see Figures 1 and 2).  
The limits of the existing policy architecture are also visible in public and policy 
discourse on Australia’s ties with Taiwan. Debate about the bilateral relationship 
is often singularly focused on the question of whether Australia would join with 
the Uni ted States in military action against China in the event of cross -Strait 
conflict.9 Despite the importance of interrogating such a worst-case scenario, it 
risks reducing Taiwan to a proxy for US power in the region, and narrowing the 
question of responses to a Taiwan Strait crisis to options under the US alliance 
structure. A more compre hensive Taiwan policy architecture centred on the 
bilateral Australia –Taiwan relationship would broaden understanding of 
developments in the Taiwan Strait and be able to account for implications in the 
trade, political, people-to-people, and humanitarian, as well as military, domains. 
This further suggests the need for a clearer and more proactive policy position 
that articulates and leverages Australia’s one-China policy for mutually beneficial 
engagement with Taiwan. 
This is timely in the context of the AUKUS military technology sharing agreement 
between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. If sustained, 
AUKUS will eventually give Australia greatly enhanced naval power projection 
capability and regional military interoperability. The speed, stealth, and 
endurance of nuclear-powered submarines means that they will be able to deliver 
a deterrent effect in the Taiwan Strait and surrounds. But AUKUS should be 
complemented with a comprehensive Taiwan strategy that supports calibrated 
actions by Australia across the full range of its tools of statecraft that span its 
foreign and trade policies. Such a Taiwan strategy can directly address Australia’s 
immediate economic interests in Taiwan, counteract China’s intensifying efforts 
to isolate the island, and assist Australia with the task of asserting its freedom of 
manoeuvre within its one-China policy. To achieve those objectives, Canberra will 
need to more fully articulate and exercise its legitimate rights to e ngage with 
Taipei in the trade and political arenas. 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
8 POLICY BRIEF  
 
DEEPENING AUSTRALIA’S POLITICAL 
AND TRADE TIES WITH TAIWAN 
Canberra should pursue additional trade liberalisation with Taipei, including 
backing Taiwan’s bid for CPTPP membership and starting bilateral FTA 
negotiations. Taiwan seeks CPTPP accession and has sought Australia’s 
support.10 Taiwan was Australia’s sixth -biggest export market in 2022, its 
seventh-biggest two-way trading partner, and the only one of the top ten export 
markets with which Australia does not have either a bilateral FTA or shared 
membership in a regional multilateral FTA (see Figure 1).
11 In 2022, Taiwan also 
rose to become Australia’s fourth -biggest merchandise export market. 12 
Bringing Taiwan into the CPTPP and negotiating a bilateral FTA with Taipei would 
provide Australian exporters with better access to a market that is already among 
Australia’s most valuable. Although Taiwan has generally low tariff rates, 
Australian agricultural exporters are especially likely to benefit from such free 
trade agreements.
13 
Figure 1: Australia’s top ten export partners (2022) and FTAs 
Export partner Bilateral FTA Shared membership 
of a regional FTA 
China √ √ 
Japan √ √ 
South Korea √ √ 
India √ × 
United States √ × 
Taiwan × × 
Singapore √ √ 
New Zealand √ √ 
Vietnam × √ 
Malaysia √ √ 

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  9 
 
China similarly seeks CPTPP membership, is on the record opposing Taiwan’s 
accession, and in 2016–17 pressured Australia out of negotiating a bilateral FTA 
with Taiwan.14 Australia should, however, not be deterred by China’s opposition 
and past pressure. Given the CPTPP’s requirements and disciplines on state -
owned enterprises, labour, and e -commerce, among other issues, Taiwan is a 
much more plausible prospective member than China.15 Moreover, in contrast to 
China’s extensive use of economic coercion against Australia since May 2020, 
Taiwan has a strong record as a reliable economic partner. Meanwhile, neither 
Australia’s bilateral FTA with China nor their joint membership of the Regi onal 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership protected Australian exporters from 
Beijing’s economic coercion.16 
Taiwan has long used multilateral trade 
organisations to maintain international 
space, and its membership of the CPTPP 
would serve its interests in that way. 
Beijing’s opposition to Taipei’s membership 
is likely aimed at, among other objectives, 
foreclosing international avenues for Taiwan. 
But Beijing does not have legitimate 
grounds for objecting to either Taiwan’s bid 
for CPTPP membership or bilateral FTA negotiations between Canberra and 
Taipei. In both cases, the Taiwanese government can enter into trade agreements 
as the representative of an economy —  not a sovereign state —  as it has done 
with its membership of the World Trade Organization and APEC.
17 The Australian 
government is entirely within its rights to both back Taiwan’s push for CPTPP 
membership and commence bilateral FTA negotiations, despite not recognising 
Taiwan as a sovereign state.18 That would be in line with common international 
trade practice, as exemplified in the precedent of Australia negotiating FTAs with 
e c o n o m i e s  s u c h  a s  H o n g  K o n g  r a t h e r  t h a n  s t a t e s ,  a s  w e l l  a s  A r t i c l e  5  o f  t h e  
CPTPP agreement.  
Australia and Taiwan should also establish a program of regular and publicly 
advertised trade and other relevant ministerial meetings. Given the large 
Australia–Taiwan trade relationship and shared experience of managing 
economic coercion, an Annual Trade Ministers’ Meeting would allow both sides 
to advance their trade and economic security agendas.
19 Australia’s critical role 
as a supplier of both energy and minerals to Taiwan may also warrant at least ad 
hoc ministerial engagement in the resources and energy portfolios. 20 Australia 
and Taiwan already hold Bilateral Economic Consultations, Joint Energy and 
Minerals, Trade and Investment Cooperation Consultations, and an Agricultural 
Working Group meeting. 21 Regularly elevating these engagements to the 
ministerial level and publicly advertising them would both ensure that Australia 
exercised its freedom to engage with Taiwan under its one -China policy and 
Regular and public 
ministerial meetings 
between Australia and 
Taiwan would be 
consistent with Australian 
government practice. 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
10 POLICY BRIEF  
 
provide the Australian government with opportunities to articulate the scope 
that it enjoys to legitimately develop ties with Taipei. Publicly elevating these 
engagements to the ministerial level would also encourage Australian businesses 
to take advantage  of economic opportunities that the corporate sector might 
otherwise be deterred from pursing due to the perceived sensitivity of 
engagement with Taiwan.
22 
 
Beijing’s opposition to Taipei’s membership of the CPTPP is likely aimed at foreclosing 
international avenues for Taiwan (Thomas Tucker/Unsplash) 
 
Regular and public ministerial meetings between Australia and Taiwan would be 
consistent with Australian government practice. In recent decades, Australian 
ministers in the trade and related portfolios continued to meet with their 
Taiwanese counterparts, i ncluding on official visits to Taiwan. These regular 
ministerial meetings and visits occurred despite Australia not recognising Taiwan 
as a sovereign state. This follows the normal practice of ministers prosecuting 
Australia’s economic and trade interests  with a range of territories and 
international actors that the Australian government does not recognise as 
countries.
23 Prominent examples of past Australian ministerial visits to Taiwan 
include Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson’s 2011 trip and 
Minister f or T rade and Competitiveness Craig Emerson ’s 2012 visit, which w as 
the last publicly reported visit to T aiwan by a serving Australian minister. 24 
Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan participated in online 
dialogue with Minister of Economic Affairs Wang Mei -h u a  i n  J u l y  2 0 2 1  a n d  
reportedly met with Minister -Without-Portfolio John Deng in April 2021, while 
Minister for Trade and Tourism Don Farrell met Minister-Without-Portfolio Deng 
on the sidelines of an APEC meeting in May 2023. 25 Since 1990, ministers from 
both sides of Australian politics across a range of trade and related portfolios 
have visited Taiwan (see Figure 2). 


ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  11 
 
Figure 2: Publicly reported visits to Taiwan by Australian ministers and junior 
ministers since 1990 
Title at time of visit Name Time of visit 
Minister for Trade and Competitiveness Craig Emerson Sep 2012 
Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson Jun/Jul 2011 
Minister for Vocational and Technical Education Gary Hardgrave Nov 2005 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport and Regional Services 
Ronald Boswell Oct 2003 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport and Regional Services 
Ronald Boswell Nov 2001 
Minister for Trade Mark Vaile Feb 2001 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport and Regional Services 
Ronald Boswell Nov 1999 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
Judith Troeth Jun 1999 
Minister for Industry, Science and Resources Nick Minchin Apr 1999 
Minister for Resources and Energy Warwick Parer Sep 1997 
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy John Anderson Sep 1996 
Minister for Trade Bob McMullan Nov 1995 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Transport 
Neil O'Keefe May 1995 
Minister for Tourism Michael Lee Jul 1994 
Minister for Trade Peter Cook Oct/Nov 1993 
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for 
Primary Industries and Energy 
Nick Sherry 1993 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
12 POLICY BRIEF  
 
Australia should also more regularly and clearly articulate the scope of its one -
China policy. China propagates disinformation in the form of the falsehoods that 
Australia is committed to Beijing’s view that Taiwan is simply a province of the 
PRC and that therefore Canberra cannot l egitimately expand its ties with 
Taipei.26 In this context, more effort to publicly advertise and explain ministerial 
meetings with Taiwanese counterparts would provide a valuable opportunity to 
correct China’s deceptive messaging about the limits of Australia’s legitimate 
engagement with Taiwan. Moreover, keeping these engagements quiet or 
eschewing them entirely risks giving the misleading impression that these kinds 
of meetings are verboten and could thereby inadvertently serve China’s efforts 
to curtail Australia’s engagement with Taiwan. The Australian government should 
also consider, among other initiatives, correcting especially serious examples of 
Beijing’s disinformation about Australia’s one-China policy and publishing an 
official factsheet that explains the historical reasons for and cont emporary 
relevance of Canberra’s one-China policy.
27 
Australian parliamentarians should also be encouraged to engage with Taiwan 
more openly. Like their counterparts from a wide range of North Atlantic and 
Asian democracies, Australian parliamentarians have in recent years continued 
to visit Taiwan.28 But some of these visits have been kept quiet or at least not 
openly discussed with the media and the Australian public.29 As with ministerial 
engagements, such parliamentary visits are entirely consistent with Australia’s 
one-China policy and keeping them discreet could inadvertently play into 
Beijing’s hands by implying that Australian parliamentarians should cater to the 
Chinese government’s sensitivities by not visiting Taipei.
30 Parliamentarians 
should be free to publicly broadcast these engagements to ensure that Canberra 
exercises, and the public understands, the freedom Australia enjoys to engage 
with Taiwan as part of its longstanding and bipartisan one -China policy.  
 

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  13 
 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE AUSTRALIA –
CHINA RELATIONSHIP  
Although the Chinese government would object to the policy proposals 
advocated in this paper, they pose limited risks for the Australia –China 
relationship overall. First, none of the measures advocated in this paper is at 
odds with Australia’s longstanding one-China policy of recognising the PRC as 
“the sole legal Government of China”. 31 The trade and political engagement 
advocated in this paper is entirely consistent with the way Australia engages with 
many territories and international actors that it does not recognise as sovereign. 
Second, the measures advocated in this paper are simil ar to the forms of 
engagement pursued by a wide range of Australian allies and partners.
32 
Lawmakers and parliamentarians from the 
Philippines, India, Japan, Indonesia, 
numerous European countries, Canada, the 
United Kingdom, the United States, and 
elsewhere have publicly advertised their 
visits to Taiwan. Meanwhile, the UK Trade 
Minister visite d Taiwan in November 2022 
and the German Education Minister visited in 
March 2023.
33 Moreover, Singapore and 
New Zealand already have bilateral FTAs 
with Taiwan, and Washington has signed a 
bilateral trade facilitation arrangement with 
Taipei.34 The policy options recommended 
here are not more assertive than those currently pursued by a wide range of 
likeminded countries. Importantly, this includes countries such as Singapore and 
New Zealand, which have significantly less strained ties with China than does 
Australia and which a re not as strategically aligned with Washington as is 
Canberra.
35 
Of course, Beijing will still object to such efforts to deepen engagement with 
Taiwan even if they are consistent with Australia’s one -China policy and the 
policies of many other countries. Indeed, China privately pressured Australia 
when it sought to expand trade ties with Taiwan via a bilateral FTA that was 
abandoned by the Turnbull government in 2016 –17.36 At the same time, China 
has criticised other countries for engaging with Taiwan in the ways advocated in 
this paper, including diplomatic objections to the UK Trade Minister’s and the 
German Education Minister’s visits. 37 However, based on Beijing’s recent 
behaviour, the Chinese government is likely to limit itself to making private 
representations and criticising the Australian government via the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the state-controlled Chinese media if Canberra pursues the 
Taiwan strategy advocated in this paper. Crucially, in the numerous cases of 
Although the Chinese 
government would object 
to the policy proposals 
advocated in this paper, 
they pose limited risks for 
the Australia– China 
relationship overall. 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
14 POLICY BRIEF  
 
public ministerial and parliamentarian visits to Taipei and FTAs with Taiwan, the 
relevant countries have not experienced significant or sustained downturns in 
their relations with China.  
 
Singapore and New Zealand already have bilateral FTAs with Taiwan, with both countries 
not as strategically aligned with Washington as is Canberra (Chuttersnap/Unsplash) 
 
Australia’s pursuit of additional trade liberalisation with Taiwan via a bilateral FTA 
and support for its CPTPP membership might frustrate China more than 
Singapore’s and New Zealand’s respective agreements that were inked in 2013 
when China was less powe rful, its statecraft was less assertive, and the more 
Beijing-friendly Nationalist government was in power in Taipei. Still, China has not 
sought to publicly pressure Singapore or New Zealand to withdraw from their 
FTAs with Taiwan, suggesting a willingness on China’s part to tolerate countries 
pursuing expanded trade engagement with Taiwan even as Beijing seeks to limit 
Taipei’s international connections. China’s private and public criticisms of the 
Australian government and efforts to dissuade Canberra f rom bringing Taipei 
into new trade agreements would admittedly not be welcomed in Australia, but 
objections from Beijing are already a common feature of bilateral ties on a wide 
range of issues. 38 The policies to expand trade and political engagement with 
Taiwan advocated in this paper will thereby likely only add another irritant to 
Australia–China ties without jeopardising the relationship overall. 
  


ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  15 
 
Unlike other countries, Lithuania has experienced a severe downturn in its trade 
and diplomatic ties with China in the wake of its expanded engagement with 
Taiwan. Following the establishment of a Taiwanese Representative Office in 
Vilnius in 2021, which d id not use Beijing’s preferred nomenclature of Taipei 
Economic and Cultural Office, China reduced imports from Lithuania by nearly 
90 per cent and imposed some informal secondary sanctions against companies 
that depended on the Lithuanian market. 39 The Lithuanian experience is, 
however, not a reliable guide to what might happen to the Australia –China 
relationship if the Taiwan strategy advocated in this paper is pursued. First, and 
most importantly, this paper’s Taiwan strategy does not include maki ng the 
changes to nomenclature that deeply frustrated the Chinese government in the 
case of Lithuania–Taiwan ties. Second, Lithuania’s one-China policy is different 
from Australia’s and more closely resembles Beijing’s own one-China principle, 
which likely contributed to China’s especially harsh response.40 Third, Australia’s 
history of engagement with Taiwan is far longer and deeper than Lithuania’s, 
meaning that China is much more accustomed to sustained and strong trade, 
political, people -to-people, cultural, and other ties between Australia and 
Taiwan.
41 Fourth and finally, Australia matters much more than Lithuania to 
China economically and strategically, so Beijing would suffer massively greater 
economic and diplomatic costs if it sought to impose such extreme trade 
restrictions on Australia. 
The Taiwan strategy advocated in this paper will be a net negative for the 
Australia–China relationship, but it is unlikely to disturb the relationship more 
than a range of Australian policies that already deeply frustrate Beijing, including 
Australia’s acquisition of nuclear -powered submarines and the Australian 
government’s opposition to China playing a security role in the Pacific Islands 
region.
42 Although Taiwan is considered a “core interest” for China, none of the 
measures advocated here impinges on that interest any more than the policies 
pursued by a range of other countries that have in recent years had less fractious 
relations with China. 43 Any damage to the Australia –China relationship is 
therefore likely to be manageable. China’s current pursuit of relationship repair 
with Australia also makes now the optimal time to deepen Canberra’s 
engagement with Taipei. Despite not winning any major policy reversals from the 
Albanese government since it took office in May 2022, China has relented in its 
campaign of diplomatic punishment of Australia and continues to unwind trade 
restrictions.44 Having progressively turned the trade and diplomatic taps back 
on with Australia, China is likely to be reluctant to quickly reverse course, 
especially in light of Beijing’s goal of keeping relations with Canberra on a 
positive trajectory to pursue its own trade and diplomatic objectives.45 This likely 
provides Australia with additional latitude to take positions that frustrate China 
without suffering significant trade and diplomatic fallout. 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
16 POLICY BRIEF  
 
NOTES  
 
Cover image: Taiwan Strait (Gallo Images/Orbital Horizon/Copernicus Sentinel Data 
2019/Getty Images) 
Notes for One-China policy infographic:  
1. See “Questions and Answers Concerning the Taiwan Question (2): What is the One-
China Principle? What is the Basis of the One-China Principle?”, Mission of the 
People’s Republic of China to the European Union, 15 August 2022, 
http://eu.china-
mission.gov.cn/eng/more/20220812Taiwan/202208/t20220815_10743591.htm. 
2. See “Joint Communiqué of the Australian Government and the Government of the 
People’s Republic of China Concerning the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations 
Between Australia and China”, 21 December 1972, 
https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/original/00003119.pdf. 
3. For detailed analysis of the meaning and variety of various one-China policies and 
principles, see Ian Chong, “The Many ‘One Chinas’: Multiple Approaches to Taiwan 
and China”, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 9 February 2023, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2023/02/09/many-one-chinas-multiple-
approaches-to-taiwan-and-china-pub-89003. 
______________________________________________ 
 
1 The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, The Taiwan Affairs 
Office of the State Council and The State Council Information Office of the People’s 
Republic of China, August 2022, 
https://english.www.gov.cn/archive/whitepaper/202208/10/content_WS62f34f46
c6d02e533532f0ac.html. 
2 Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, US 
Department of Defense, 2023, 
https://media.defense.gov/2023/Oct/19/2003323409/-1/-1/1/2023-MILITARY-
AND-SECURITY-DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-THE-PEOPLES-REPUBLIC-OF-
CHINA.PDF. 
3 Kevin Liptak, “Biden’s Past Promises for US to Defend Taiwan Under Microscope in 
Meeting with China’s Xi”, CNN, 14 November 2022, 
https://edition.cnn.com/2022/11/13/politics/joe-biden-taiwan/index.html. 
4 Penny Wong, “Australian Interests in a Regional Balance of Power”, Address to the 
National Press Club, Canberra, 17 April 2023, 
https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/minister/penny-wong/speech/national-press-
club-address-australian-interests-regional-balance-power. 
5 Benjamin Herscovitch, “Australia’s Shifting Statements on Taiwan”, Beijing to Canberra 
and Back, 4 August 2022, 
https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/i/67072098/australias-shifting-statements-
on-taiwan. 
 

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  17 
 
 
6 Benjamin Herscovitch, “Taiwan and the War of Wills”, in Linda Jaivin, Esther Sunkyung 
Klein, and Sharon Strange (eds.), China Story Yearbook: Contradiction, (Canberra: 
ANU Press, 2022), pp. 203–207. 
7 “Joint Communiqué of the Australian Government and the Government of the People’s 
Republic of China Concerning the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between 
Australia and China”, 21 December 1972, 
https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/original/00003119.pdf. 
8 Mark Harrison, “Australia–Taiwan Relations”, in Bryce Wakefield (ed.), Taiwan, Cross-
Strait Tension and Security in the Indo-Pacific, (Canberra: Australian Institute of 
International Affairs, 2021), pp. 30–36, https://www.internationalaffairs.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/Taiwan-special-report-1-PAGE-NO-BLEED.pdf. 
9 See, for example, Jonathan Pearlman (ed.), “The Taiwan Choice: Showdown in Asia”, 
Australian Foreign Affairs, No. 14, February 2022. 
10 Bernie Lai, “Taiwan’s Bid to Join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP)”, FlagPost, 20 December 2021, 
https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_departments/Parliament
ary_Library/FlagPost/2021/December/Taiwan_CPTPP_bid; Joint Standing 
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade, “Expanding Membership of the 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership”, 12 
October 2021, 
https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22c
ommittees%2Fcommjnt%2F25097%2F0001%22. 
11 “Australia’s Trade in Goods and Services by Top 15 Partners (2020–2022)”, 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/australias-goods-and-services-by-top-
15-partners-2022.pdf; “Australia’s Free Trade Agreements (FTAs)”, Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade, https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/trade-
agreements. Figure 1 uses the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s 
categorisation of Australia’s top trade partners and therefore does not include 
regional groupings such as the European Union (EU) or the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), both of which would feature in the top ten if they 
were included in the list. 
12 “International Trade in Goods and Services, Australia”, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 
4 May 2023, https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/international-
trade/international-trade-goods-and-services-australia/latest-release. 
13 Benjamin Herscovitch, “Australia’s Trade Access Agenda Should Take Advantage of 
Taiwan”, East Asia Forum, 24 October 2023, 
https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2023/10/24/australias-trade-access-agenda-
should-take-advantage-of-taiwan/. 
14 Li Keqiang, Report on the Work of the Government, 14th National People’s Congress 
of the People’s Republic of China, 5 March 2023, https://npcobserver.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/03/2023-Government-Work-Report.pdf; “Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s Regular Press Conference”, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the People’s Republic of China, 23 September 2021, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/
202109/t20210923_9580315.html; Fergus Hunter, “Australia Abandoned Plans 
for Taiwanese Free Trade Agreement after Warning from China”, The Sydney 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
18 POLICY BRIEF  
 
 
Morning Herald, 24 October 2018, 
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/australia-abandoned-plans-for-taiwanese-
free-trade-agreement-after-warning-from-china-20181024-p50bj5.html. 
15 Jeffrey J. Schott, “Which Countries are in the CPTPP and RCEP Trade Agreements 
and Which Want In?”, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 27 July 2023, 
https://www.piie.com/research/piie-charts/which-countries-are-cptpp-and-rcep-
trade-agreements-and-which-want. 
16 “Australia’s Free Trade Agreements (FTAs)”, Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade, https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/trade-agreements. 
17 “Australia–Taiwan Relationship”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/taiwan/australia-taiwan-relationship. 
18 “Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership Text and 
Associated Documents”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/in-force/cptpp/official-documents; 
“Australia’s Free Trade Agreements (FTAs)”, Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade, https://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/trade-agreements. 
19 “Taiwan: Key Economic Indicators”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/taiw-cef.pdf. 
20 “Taiwan: Key Economic Indicators”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/taiw-cef.pdf.  
21 “Australia–Taiwan Relationship”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/taiwan/australia-taiwan-relationship.  
22 Authors’ discussions with Australian business organisations. 
23 See, for example, past Australian trade ministerial visits to Hong Kong, including 
“Visit to Hong Kong”, Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, The Hon Steven 
Ciobo MP, 19 March 2018, https://www.trademinister.gov.au/minister/steven-
ciobo/media-release/visit-hong-kong; “Trade Minister to Visit Hong Kong”, 
Australian Consulate-General, Guangzhou, China, 29 October 2010, 
https://guangzhou.china.embassy.gov.au/gzho/MediaEn1005.html. 
24 Other visits to Taiwan by Australian ministers and junior ministers may have occurred 
without being publicly reported. Figure 2 is based on the travel records of current 
and past parliamentary members, which are available on the Parliament of Australia 
website: https://www.aph.gov.au/Senators_and_Members/Senators. 
25 Benjamin Herscovitch, “Talking with Taiwan”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 16 June 
2023, https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/i/128539800/talking-with-taiwan. 
26 On prominent examples of Chinese government disinformation in relation to 
Australia’s one-China policy and engagement with Taiwan, see, for example, Xiao 
Qian, “Uphold One-China Principle to Keep Regional Peace, Ambassador Says”, 
Australian Financial Review, 24 August 2022, 
https://www.afr.com/world/asia/uphold-one-china-principle-to-keep-regional-
peace-ambassador-says-20220824-p5bcc7; Xiao Qian, “Taiwan is Always Part of 
China, but War with Australia is a Fallacy”, The Sydney Morning Herald, 23 March 
2023, https://www.smh.com.au/world/asia/taiwan-will-be-ours-but-war-with-
australia-is-a-fallacy-20230322-p5cuaj.html. 
 

ENHAN CING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
POLICY BRIEF  19 
 
 
27 For a longer menu of policy options to respond to Beijing’s disinformation regarding 
Australia’s one-China policy, see Benjamin Herscovitch, “All about Taiwan (CPTPP, 
Disinformation, and Ministerial Visits)”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 12 April 
2023, https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/p/all-about-taiwan-cptpp-
disinformation. 
28 Sean Johnson, “Political Junkets and Influence”, Open Politics, 25 January 2022, 
https://openpolitics.au/analysis/foreign-junkets; Sean Johnson, “Taipei 
Confidential: More Junkets Exposed”, Open Politics, 23 March 2023, 
https://openpolitics.au/analysis/social-media-posts-expose-more-undeclared-
junkets. 
29 Benjamin Herscovitch, “A Taiwan Trip”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 18 October 
2023, https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/i/138089045/a-taiwan-trip. 
30 “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference”, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 6 December 2022, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/
202212/t20221206_10985948.html. 
31 “Joint Communiqué of the Australian Government and the Government of the 
People’s Republic of China Concerning the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations 
Between Australia and China”, 21 December 1972, 
https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/original/00003119.pdf. 
32 Ian Chong, “The Many ‘One Chinas’: Multiple Approaches to Taiwan and China”, 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 9 February 2023, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2023/02/09/many-one-chinas-multiple-
approaches-to-taiwan-and-china-pub-89003. 
33 “UK Strengthens Taiwan Trade Ties as Minister Visits Taipei”, Department for 
International Trade, 7 November 2022, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-
strengthens-taiwan-trade-ties-as-minister-visits-taipei; “German Minister Makes 
Landmark Visit to Taiwan”, DW, 21 March 2023, https://www.dw.com/en/german-
minister-makes-landmark-visit-to-taiwan/a-65056645. 
34 “FTAs Signed with Trading Partners”, The Bureau of Foreign Trade, 2021, 
https://www.trade.gov.tw/english/Pages/List.aspx?nodeID=672; “United States and 
Taiwan Announce the Launch of the US–Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade”, 
Office of the United States Trade Representative, 1 June 2022, 
https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-
releases/2022/june/united-states-and-taiwan-announce-launch-us-taiwan-
initiative-21st-century-trade. 
35 See, for example, Lee Hsien Loong, “The Endangered Asian Century: America, China, 
and the Perils of Confrontation”, Foreign Affairs, July/August 2020, 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/asia/2020-06-04/lee-hsien-loong-
endangered-asian-century; “The Australia, New Zealand and United States Security 
Treaty (ANZUS Treaty), 1951”, United States of America Department of State, 
https://history.state.gov/milestones/1945-1952/anzus. 
36 Fergus Hunter, “Australia Abandoned Plans for Taiwanese Free Trade Agreement 
after Warning from China”, The Sydney Morning Herald, 24 October 2018, 
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/australia-abandoned-plans-for-taiwanese-
free-trade-agreement-after-warning-from-china-20181024-p50bj5.html. 
 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES  
 
20 POLICY BRIEF  
 
 
37 “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s Regular Press Conference”, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 7 November 2022, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/
202211/t20221107_10801658.html; “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang 
Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference”, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s 
Republic of China, 21 March 2023, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/
202303/t20230321_11045969.html. 
38 “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference”, Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, 17 March 2023, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/
202303/t20230317_11043921.html. 
39 Marcin Szczepańsk, China’s Economic Coercion: Evolution, Characteristics and 
Countermeasures, European Parliamentary Research Service, November 2022, 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/738219/EPRS_BRI(2
022)738219_EN.pdf. 
40 Ian Chong, “The Many ‘One Chinas’: Multiple Approaches to Taiwan and China”, 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 9 February 2023, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2023/02/09/many-one-chinas-multiple-
approaches-to-taiwan-and-china-pub-89003. 
41 “Australia–Taiwan Relationship”, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 
https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/taiwan/australia-taiwan-relationship.  
42 For a more detailed account of the wide range of deep disagreements between 
Canberra and Beijing, see “Key Bilateral Disputes”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 
https://beijing2canberra.org/key-bilateral-disputes/. 
43 The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, The Taiwan Affairs 
Office of the State Council and The State Council Information Office of the People’s 
Republic of China, August 2022, 
https://english.www.gov.cn/archive/whitepaper/202208/10/content_WS62f34f46
c6d02e533532f0ac.html. 
44 Benjamin Herscovitch, “Beijing’s Backdown and the Role of Canberra’s Softer Tone 
on China”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 2 February 2023, 
https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/p/beijings-backdown-and-the-role-of. 
45 Benjamin Herscovitch, “China’s CPTPP Pressure to Mount, Warming Wine Prospects, 
and Ministerial Meetings”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 10 May 2023, 
https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/p/chinas-cptpp-pressure-to-mount-
warming; Benjamin Herscovitch, “The Prime Minister’s Visit, What Really Caused 
Relationship Repair, and a Policy Takeaway”, Beijing to Canberra and Back, 9 
November 2023, https://beijing2canberra.substack.com/p/the-prime-ministers-
visit-what-really. 

ENHANCING AUSTRALIA’S TAIWAN TIES 
POLICY BRIEF  
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Benjamin Herscovitch is a Research Fellow in the School of Regulation 
and Global Governance at the Australian National University (ANU). His 
primary areas of research are Australia –China relations and China’s 
statecraft. He is the author of Beijing to Canberra and Back, a fortnightly 
newsletter chronicling Australia–China relations. Prior to joining the ANU, 
he was an analyst and policy officer in the Department of Defence, 
specialising in China’s external policy and Australia’s defence diplomacy. 
He was previously a researche r for Beijing -based think tanks and 
consultancies. 
 
 
 
 
Dr Mark Harrison  is Senior Lecturer in the Politics and International 
Relations program at the University of Tasmania, and an Expert Associate 
at the National Security College at the Australian National University. He 
was previously Research Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Democracy 
at the University of Westminster in London, UK. He has a PhD in Chinese 
Studies from Monash University and is author of Legitimacy, Meaning and 
Knowledge in the Making of Taiwanese Identity (Palgrave, 2007) and a wide 
range of other writi ng on politics and culture in Taiwan, and Australia ’s 
relations with T aiwan and China. He has a forthcoming book Revolutionary 
Taiwan, with Catherine Chou (Cambria, 2023). He is a frequent participant 
in policy forward engagement on Taiwan with Australian policymakers, 
including through track 2 dialogue. 
 
Benjamin Herscovitch 
 
 
 
 
Mark Harrison 
 


 
 
 
31 Bligh Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Tel. +61 2 8238 9000 
Fax +61 2 8238 9005 
lowyinstitute.org 
@LowyInstitute 